Episerver CMS
Editor User Guide

© Episerver 2017
Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Release date 2017-12-04

Table of Contents | 3

Table of contents
Table of contents

3

Introduction

11

Features, licenses and releases

11

Copyright notice

12

About Episerver

12

Features

13

CMS

13

Commerce

13

Add-ons

13

What's new?

15

Getting started

16

Logging in

16

Accessing features

16

Navigation

16

Next steps

17

User interface

17

General features

18

Panes

19

Left-hand navigation pane

20

Right-hand assets pane

20

Editing

21

Real-time Updates

22

Network problems

23

WebSocket support

23

My settings

24

Add-ons

24

© Episerver 2017

4 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Working in On-page editing view

25

Editing additional properties

27

Working in All properties editing view

28

Global properties

28

Basic info properties

28

Tabs

29

Commerce-related content

33

Assets

33

Folders

33

Creating, renaming and moving folders

35

Deleting folders

35

Setting access rights for folders

35

Managing folders in multiple languages

36

Media

36

Searching for media

37

Uploading media

38

Publishing media

38

Inserting media

38

Previewing media

38

Downloading media

38

Editing metadata for media

38

Renaming media

38

Replacing media

39

Managing media file versions

39

Blocks

39

Creating a block

40

Editing a block

42

Using blocks in content

43

© Episerver 2017

Table of Contents | 5

Moving, copying and removing blocks in folders

46

Versions, content languages and access rights for blocks

47

Roles and tasks

47

Visitor

47

Community member

47

Content editor

48

Marketer

48

Merchandiser

48

Website owner

48

Administrator

48

Developer

48

Finding content

49

Creating content

51

Creating a page

51

Creating a block

51

Commerce-related content

52

Editing content using the rich-text editor

52

Formatting

52

Copying and pasting

53

Adding links

54

Creating a link

54

Link properties

58

Image link

59

Link collection

59

Linking to catalog entries

61

Adding and editing images

61

Adding images to content

62

Editing images

62

© Episerver 2017

6 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Removing images from content

64

Changing image properties

64

Adding embedded media

66

Advanced settings

66

Adding dynamic content

68

Editing dynamic content

70

Episerver User-Generated Content

70

Creating a UGC widget for Episerver CMS
Built-in forms functionality (Legacy)

71
75

Using the built-in forms functionality

76

Managing forms

76

Creating a form

77

Common form field properties

79

Form field types

80

Viewing and exporting form data

82

Exporting forms

83

Managing content

84

Commerce-related content

84

Optimizing content to improve search

84

Working with multiple languages

84

Enabling content languages

85

User interface languages

85

Commerce and multiple languages

85

Episerver Find and multiple languages

85

Translating content

85

Switching language and viewing language versions

86

Translating existing content

89

Global properties

91

© Episerver 2017

Table of Contents | 7

Creating new content in another language

92

Commerce and multiple languages

92

Fallback languages

92

Setting fallback and replacement languages
Personalizing content

93
95

Working with personalization

96

Applying personalization

96

Editing and removing personalization settings

98

Providing access to content using visitor groups

102

Monitoring visitor group activities

103

Personalizing Commerce content

103

Personalization using add-ons

103

Previewing content

103

Comparing versions

105

Comparing content

106

Comparing language versions when translating content
Comparing properties

107
107

Setting access rights from edit view

108

Structuring the website

110

The page tree

110

Moving, copying and removing pages

111

Moving a page

111

Copying a page

111

Removing content

111

Sorting page order in menus

112

Deleting and restoring content

114

Moving content to trash

115

Restoring content

116

© Episerver 2017

8 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Deleting content permanently

116

Working with versions

117

Publishing actions

117

Managing versions

121

Unpublishing content

125

Setting expiration of content

125

Archiving of expired content

125

Working with shared content

126

A/B testing

127

How it works

127

Statistical significance

128

Starting an A/B test

129

Viewing a running A/B test

133

Picking a winner

134

Publishing a test winner automatically

135

Publishing a test winner manually

135

Managing A/B tests

136

Viewing completed and archived tests

137

Setting default values for A/B testing

138

Controlling the publishing process

139

Content approvals

141

How it works

141

Sequences and reviewers

141

Content approvals on assets

142

Multiple languages

144

Approval rejections

144

Notifications and tasks

144

What happens if a reviewer is away and cannot approve?

148

© Episerver 2017

Table of Contents | 9

Example: Content approval sequence in two steps

148

Working with approval sequences

149

Starting an approval sequence

149

Approving or declining an approval step

150

Canceling an approval sequence

150

Commenting when approving and declining content

151

Projects

152

The projects gadget

153

Working with projects

153

The projects feature

160

Projects user interface

162

Working with projects

167

Examples of using the project functionality

171

Working with comments

177

Reports

182

Reports for CMS content

182

Reports in Commerce

183

Managing gadgets

184

Adding gadgets

185

Rearranging gadgets

185

Removing gadgets

185

Built-in gadgets

185

Commerce-specific gadgets

186

Add-ons

186

Managing dashboard tabs

186

Tabs

186

Creating tabs

187

Editing tabs

187

© Episerver 2017

10 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Deleting tabs

187

Dashboard gadgets

187

External links

188

Forms viewer

188

Notes

189

RSS feed reader

189

Visitor groups statistics

189

Search

190

Built-in search features

190

Search options

190

Search tips

192

Sorting search results

192

Configuring search

192

Extended search with Episerver Find

192

Index

193

© Episerver 2017

Introduction | 11

Introduction
Online help describes the features and functionality of the Episerver platform, and covers CMS for
content management, Commerce for e-commerce functionality, Find for extended search, and
Episerver add-ons. You access it from within the Episerver platform or from Episerver World. The online
help is also available in PDF format for users who prefer PDF or want to print the documentation.
This PDF describes the features and functionality of Episerver CMS which you can find on Episerver
World. Developer guides and technical documentation also are found on Episerver World.
The user documentation is intended for editors, administrators, marketers and merchandisers, working
with tasks as described in Roles and tasks.

Features, licenses and releases
The user documentation is continuously updated and covers the latest releases for the Episerver
platform.
Episerver CMS is the core part of the Episerver platform providing advanced
content creation and publishing features for all types of website content. CMS
features are available in all Episerver installations.
Episerver Commerce adds complete e-commerce capabilities to the core
functionality in CMS. Commerce requires additional license activation.
Add-ons extend the Episerver capabilities with features like advanced search,
multi-variate testing, and social media integration. Some add-ons are free, others

© Episerver 2017

12 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
require license activation. Add-ons by Episerver are described in the online help.
Due to frequent feature releases, this user guide may describe functionality that is not yet
available on your website. See What's new to find out in which area and release a specific
feature became available.

Copyright notice
© Episerver 1996 – 2017. All rights reserved.
All information and content within this document is the sole copyright of Episerver. Changes to the
contents, or partial copying of the contents, may not be done without permission. The document may be
freely distributed in its entirety, digitally or in printed format, to all users of Episerver Software. Episerver
assumes no liability or responsibility for any errors or omissions in the content of this document.
Episerver reserves the right to alter functionality and technical system requirements. Episerver is a
registered trademark of Episerver AB. Ektron is a registered trademark of Episerver Inc.

About Episerver
The base of the Episerver platform is the CMS (Content Management System) with its core features for
online content creation, publishing, and website management. The platform can be extended with
Episerver Commerce for managing e-commerce tasks, and Episerver Find for building advanced search
features, and a broad selection of other add-ons from both Episerver and third-parties.

© Episerver 2017

Introduction | 13

Features

CMS
Episerver CMS is a powerful yet easy to use web content management platform, based on cutting edge
technology. The intuitive user interface and superior usability of Episerver CMS allow both experienced
and occasional users to efficiently manage website content. See Managing content in the CMS Editor
user guide to work with CMS features.

Commerce
Adding Episerver Commerce to your CMS solution brings e-commerce functionality such as catalog,
customer and order management, combining the powerful content publishing and display features of
CMS with advanced back-end online store management. See Commerce user guide for Episerver
Commerce features.

Add-ons
There are many add-ons available for extending your Episerver solution. The add-ons from Episerver
described in this documentation add features such as advanced search, Google Analytics and social
media integrations. Add-ons are usually installed on your website by a developer and you may have to

© Episerver 2017

14 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

add them as gadgets to make them available in the edit view. See Managing gadgets in the CMS Editor
user guide to work with gadgets.
See Introduction and What's new for licenses and recent features.

© Episerver 2017

What's new? | 15

What's new?
The Episerver user guide describes features in the Episerver platform, including CMS for content
management and Commerce for e-commerce management, and add-ons from Episerver. New features
are continuously made available through Episerver updates.
This user guide (17-6) describes features added up until and including update 191 for Episerver;
see Episerver World for previous user guide versions.
Area

Features and updates
You can now select a view (for example, on-page edit or all
properties view) and the selection stays when opening another
content item. Previously, the default view was always displayed
when you opened a content item. (update 178)
A demo video on the basic features in Content approvals has
been published:

© Episerver 2017

16 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Getting started
This section describes how to log in to an Episerver website, access features and navigate the different
views. The login procedure may be different from what is described here, depending on how your
website and infrastructure are set up. The examples described here are based on a “standard”
installation of Episerver with sample templates.

Logging in
As an editor or administrator, you usually log in to your website using a specified URL, a login button or
link. Enter your user name and password in the Episerver login dialog, and click Log In.

Accessing features
What you are allowed to do after logging in depends on your implementation and your access rights,
since these control the options you see. When logged in, the Episerver quick access menu appears in
the upper right corner.
Selecting CMS Edit takes you to the edit view and other parts of the system. You can go directly to
your personal dashboard by selecting the Dashboard option.

Navigation
Pull down the global menu, available at the very top, to navigate around. The menu displays the
different products and systems integrated with your website. Select CMS (for example) to display
available options in the submenu.

Your menu options vary depending on your access rights. These user guide examples assume
that the user has full permissions to all functions in Episerver.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 17

Next steps
User interface and Roles and tasks in the CMS Editor User Guide for the Episerver user
interface and roles.
Managing content in the CMS Editor User Guide to create and publish content.
Administration interface in the CMS Administrator User Guide to administer and configure
settings in Episerver.
Commerce User Guide to work with e-commerce tasks, if you have Episerver Commerce
installed.
Find User Guide to work with search optimization, if you have Episerver Find installed.

User interface
The Episerver user interface is flexible allowing developers to plug-in customized features
when implementing websites. This description refers to a “standard installation” of Episerver
without customizations.
The toolbar and the panes in the Episerver edit view provide easy access to functions when working
with content. When entering the edit view, you have the global menu and the toolbar at the top, and
adjustable panes to the left and right.

The global menu provides access to other areas of the Episerver platform. You can also access this
user guide, your user settings and a global search from the global menu. In some areas, you pull down
the global menu with the arrow.

© Episerver 2017

18 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

The toolbar contains features like preview and view options, and lets you add items such as pages or
blocks.

The page information area below the toolbar displays the page name, the path to the page and when it
was last autosaved. If it is possible to undo the latest changes you did to the content, there is also an
Undo link.

A notification toolbar may be displayed below the toolbar showing confirmation and error messages and
such.

General features
Context-sensitive actions. Some features are only available in certain context. The toolbar (for
example) presents relevant actions depending on what you are currently doing, and the add (+)
button also offers context-sensitive options.
Primary actions. Some actions open in a new window, for example, a page delete confirmation.
The background is then dimmed, meaning that you must finish the primary action to continue.
Action feedback and notifications. Successful actions are confirmed by a message in the
notification bar. A notification may also appear in case of an error requiring you to take action.
Drag-and-drop operations. Drag-and-drop is supported in many areas. For example, you can
drag pages, media files and blocks into the rich-text area or content areas, or re-arrange the page
tree structure using drag-and-drop.
Tooltips. Hover the mouse over a button or field and a short tooltip appears.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 19

Keyboard commands. Standard keyboard commands are supported in many areas, such as
when you move pages in the page tree or in the rich-text editor.
Search. Supported in many areas to locate, such as pages in the page tree or media in the folder
structure.
Adaptable work environment. Resize and pin the panes depending on what you are currently
doing, and add and remove gadgets of your choice for quick access to functionality.
Support for time zones. Publishing actions in the edit view are done in your local time zone,
whereas administrative actions are based on server time.
Context menus are available in many areas, such as in the panes, the page tree and in item
listings. The menu displays different available options depending on where in the interface you
are and what you are doing.

Panes
The user interface has a left-hand and a right-hand pane, which can be adjusted and extended with
additional gadgets.
Pane pin is used for expanding and locking the panes in an open position.
Settings for a pane or a gadget allow you to configure or remove a gadget, or rearrange gadgets
in a pane.

© Episerver 2017

20 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Left-hand navigation pane
Contains the page tree structure (Pages), language branch (Sites) navigation, tasks management
(Tasks), and project items (Project Items) by default.

Right-hand assets pane
Contains the Media and Blocks folder structures by default. Drag and drop one or multiple items from
the assets pane into the content you are currently working on.
You can also drag and drop multiple items within the assets pane, and delete, cut or copy and paste
them, from the context menu or with standard keyboard shortcuts. Any unselected children folders are
also moved, copied or deleted.
If you copy and paste multiple folders on different levels, they will be on the same level when
pasted.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 21

If you have Episerver Commerce or Episerver Forms installed, the assets pane also displays the
Catalogs and Forms gadgets per default.

Editing
The toolbar on top displays an actions menu with context-sensitive publishing options which vary
depending on content status and user access rights. During editing, content status and autosave
information are displayed.

© Episerver 2017

22 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

When working with content such as pages and blocks in CMS, or catalog content in Commerce, there
are two editing views, On-Page Editing and All Properties, with buttons to switch between them.
On-Page Editing view provides quick access to direct editing of a selection of content properties.
All Properties view provides access to all available properties including more advanced ones
such as access rights and language settings.
When editing content properties, these options are common when adding, deleting, or selecting items:
Click to select (a category, for example).
Click to select (an image in a media folder, or a page in the page tree).
Click to remove (a category, for example).

Real-time Updates
Episerver is by default set up to display comments and changes to projects in the user interface
immediately. If Episerver experiences problems with the these immediate updates, the following dialog
box appears.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 23

The Real-time Updates dialog box can have two main reasons. It appears because Episerver has
encountered a network problem and cannot connect to the web server, or because your system does
not have the WebSocket protocol enabled, which is used for the real-time updates of the user interface.
Network problems
Network problems occur if there is an error in the web server configuration, or if there are problems with
your corporate network or the with Internet connection. As long as there is a problem, you are unable to
continue working with Episerver.
Whatever the reason, Episerver will try to reconnect to the web server. If it still cannot connect after a
number of attempts, you get an error message saying: “The server has been unavailable for an extended
period of time. Please verify the internet connection and refresh the browser.”
Contact your IT department or Internet service provider if the problem persists.
WebSocket support
WebSocket is an Internet protocol used to automatically update the Episerver user interface.
If you are using the projects feature, the WebSocket protocol is used to check for new or updated
comments and project items from other users. As soon as one of your colleagues adds a comment or
project item, Episerver automatically updates your user interface and displays the comment or item
(assuming you have the projects interface open).
However, the WebSocket protocol must be enabled for your system by an administrator for the realtime updates to work. If it was not enabled, you can still work with Episerver and with projects and
comments but you need to manually refresh the user interface with the Refresh button to see new
comments or items.
Depending on the system configuration when the WebSocket protocol is disabled, you may or may not
see the Real-time Updates dialog box.

© Episerver 2017

24 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

My settings
Under the global menu > your user name > My settings, you can change some of your account
settings. User name and password are usually set in an external system, such as Windows or an SQL
database, and cannot be changed in Episerver in that case.
In the Display Options tab, you find the following settings:
Personal language. Select your desired user interface language from the drop-down. This
settings affects the language of the user interface, such as texts in buttons and dialog boxes. It
does not affect the language of your website.
Limit touch support. On touch-screen devices, browsers may have difficulties prioritizing
between input from the screen and from the mouse, which may cause problems such as making
it impossible to resize panes using the mouse. If you experience problems with Episerver and
the touch screen, enable the Limit touch support feature. This feature prioritizes mouse input
over touch screen input and enables the mouse for interactions such as drag and drop, resizing
of panes, and so on.

Reset all views to system default. You can reset your user interface views to the settings. If
you have changes to the user interfaces, such as added, moved or deleted gadgets, these
changes are undone and the default views are displayed.

Add-ons
An add-on is a plug-in or module, developed by Episerver or Episerver partners, to extend the
capabilities of Episerver. A developer (or someone with administrative access rights) installs most add-

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 25

ons. See Episerver World for installation, configuration, and customizing details for each add-on.
When they are installed on the website, you can add some of the add-ons as gadgets to the dashboard
or to the navigation or assets panes in edit view.

Working in On-page editing view
On-page editing is what you see when accessing the edit view in Episerver. From here you can
instantly start editing content; the areas that are available for editing are highlighted. The available areas
depend on how the page type was defined and each area is set up with a property type which controls
what you can do with each area. One area can, for example, have an image property type and is
intended for images; another area can have a page description property and is intended for text
describing the page. This means that you will have different editing options when clicking an area,
depending on the area's type of property. Typically for a page, you can edit page name, description, the
main editorial area, and perhaps a content area with blocks.

© Episerver 2017

26 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Areas and properties available for editing are implementation-specific, and depend on the type
of property and how the rendering is built on your website.

EXAMPLE: Editing a page through on-page edit
This example describes how to edit a page, but the procedure is similar when editing blocks or catalog
content if you have Commerce installed.
1. Select the page to edit from the page tree in the navigation pane.
2. Click an area to edit (property names will be displayed on mouse-over).
3. Make your changes by updating the content properties as needed. See also: Using the rich-text
editor.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 27

4. Your changes are automatically saved, and a draft version of the content (page, block and so on)
is created.
5. At any time, you can access the preview option at the top to see what the published version will
look like.
6. When done, publish the content or apply any of the other options described in Publishing and
managing versions.
Editing additional properties
The on-page editing view contains a number of properties which are reached by scrolling to the very top
of the page with the wheel on your mouse. These are called basic info properties and can be used to add
a simple address, set access rights for a page or to change the name in the URL and so on.

Not all properties are available in the on-page editing view; to see all properties, switch to the All
Properties editing view.

© Episerver 2017

28 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Working in All properties editing view
The All properties editing view provides editing access to all properties available for content, including
those that are not available in the On-page editing view. Select All Properties
in the toolbar to
access these additional properties.

Areas and properties available for editing are implementation-specific, and depend on the type
of content on your website. This topic describes some tabs and properties as they appear in
the Episerver sample templates.
Global properties
If you have content in multiple languages on your website, some properties may be locked for editing in
a specific language. These properties are “globally shared” and you can edit them only in the master
language. See Translating content.
Basic info properties
The top gray area displays the basic informational properties which are also accessible in the on-page
editing view. This area appears in the All Properties editing view.
Property
Name

Description
The name of the page. Depending on the implementation, this may be the
heading of the page, and it is also shown in the page tree structure and
menus.

Name in URL

The page URL is automatically created based on the name of the page and
its place in the navigation. It depends on the implementation if this is visible
in links on the website. If you copy a page, the URL of the original page is
copied with a number added to it. Change this if you create new content
based on existing page copies.
Changing the URL for an existing page may cause broken links.

Simple address

This is a unique URL that can be added to frequently requested pages on
your website, letting visitors locate the page simply by typing the simple

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 29
Property

Description
address name directly after the main URL of the website. Providing, for
example, products as a simple address lets you find the page just by entering the URL (for example, http://www.company.com/products) in the
address bar of the browser even if the Products page is located further down
in the navigation tree. You can use the Simple address report to manage
simple addresses for your website.

Display in nav-

Deselect this option for pages that you do not want to be visible in nav-

igation

igation structures or menus on the website.

Visible to

Indicates if public access to the content is restricted. Click Manage to
change these settings as described in Setting access rights from edit view.

Languages

Shows available languages for the content. If you have multiple languages
on your website, see Working with multiple languages.

ID, Type

Shows the unique ID set by the system and the type of content on which the
content is based.

Tools

Under tools, you find the following options:
Language Settings. Used to set fallback and replacement
languages, see Fallback languages.
Manage Expiration and Archiving. Used to set published content
as expired and for archiving content, see Setting expiration of
content.
Permanently Mark as Being Edited. Used to notify editors that
someone is working on the content item. See Working with shared
content.

Tabs
All other properties are organized using tabs. These can be added and modified in code and from the
administrative interface.
Content tab
The Content tab contains properties for entering the main content, when editing a page or a block in
CMS, or catalog content if you have Episerver Commerce installed.

© Episerver 2017

30 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Property
Category

Description
Categorization of content is useful in filtering functionality for search, navigation and listings. You create a category in the administrative interface
before you can apply it to content in edit view.
Note: A category is a built-in property in Episerver CMS. You can apply a
category to content, but your website also needs customized functionality to
display the resulting outcome, such as in a filtering. Also, do not confuse
content categories with Commerce categories; see Creating a catalog
entry.

Main body

Example of a rich-text editor property, for adding editorial content such as
text, images and links. See Using the rich-text editor.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 31

Settings tab
The Settings tab is default and contains a set of built-in properties for managing publication dates, sort
order and shortcuts.

Property

Description

Published, Created

System-generated timestamps for the content that rarely need to be

and Modified

changed.

Update modified

Select this check box if you have made significant changes to the content

date

and want the system to update the modification date and include the content
once more, such as in a subscription send-out.

Sort subpages and

Defines the sort order for pages in the page tree structure and navigation

sort index

menus. See Structuring the website.

Shortcut

Creates menu or navigation links. A shortcut will not display any content of
its own, instead it becomes a menu option linking directly to some other content on the same website or on an external website. Click Manage to add a
shortcut for the page.

© Episerver 2017

32 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Property

Description

The following shortcut types are available:
No shortcut. Creates a link that displays the content you have
created. By selecting this, you can also reset the page after using
other types of links.
Shortcut to page in Episerver CMS. Links to another page on the
same website. A visitor who clicks this link is transferred to the page
you have linked to, and kept within the same navigation menu
structure.
Shortcut to page on another website. Creates a link to an external
page or to a document on the server. Include the entire URL address,
including http://.
No shortcut, display text only. Creates a heading with no link in the
menu, without displaying any information or link to another page.
Fetch content from page in Episerver CMS. Creates a link to
another page from which content is retrieved into the original page
within the same navigation structure. Useful when re-using content on
the website, in which case you only need to maintain it in one place.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 33

From the administrative interface, you can customize and configure default values for selected
properties, or to make certain properties mandatory for editors to fill in. See Properties in the
CMS Administrator User Guide.
Commerce-related content
On an e-commerce website, content can be catalog entries such as products and variants if you have
Episerver Commerce installed. Editing this type of content is similar to the editing of pages and blocks
in CMS. See Managing content in the Commerce user guide.

Assets
Assets can be content of the type media files, images, documents, blocks or products from the
catalogs in Episerver Commerce. Assets are available from the assets pane in both CMS and
Commerce, making it easy to drag-and-drop items, such as images, blocks or products into a CMS
page.
You can work directly with content from the assets pane, such as edit images or blocks, or create
folders to organize content items. The context menu will provide different options depending on the type
of assets selected. How to work with content items in the assets pane is described in the sections
Folders, Media and Blocks.
By default, the assets pane in a standard Episerver installation will contain Blocks and Media
with the addition of Catalog entries for Episerver Commerce. Since the assets pane is a plugin area, there might be other asset types available in your installation.

Folders
Folders in the assets pane in Episerver are used for organizing content, such as media files (images,
videos and documents), and blocks. You can have folders with content that can be shared between all
websites in a multi-site scenario, or you can have folders with content that will only be available for a
specific website, or a page or block.

© Episerver 2017

34 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Note: Media and blocks share the same folder structure. This means that if you create a folder
under Media, the same folder is also created under Blocks.
Depending on your implementation, you may have the following predefined folders:
For All Sites. This is called a global folder. Its content is available to all pages and blocks for all
websites in a multi-site installation.
For This Site. This is called a site-specific folder. Its content is available only on the current
website (regardless of it is a single or multi-site installation).
For This Page or For This Block. This is called a local folder. Its content is available only for a
specific page or block and cannot be accessed from other pages or blocks. It is useful, for
example, if you have images for a specific purpose which must not be used elsewhere.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 35

If you have saved an image in the local folder and then copy the page content, including the
image, and paste it into another page, you may still see the image in the page. However, this is
due to browser caching, the image is not copied to the new page's local folder and the link is in
reality broken.

Local folders are not available for catalog content in Episerver Commerce.
Creating, renaming and moving folders
To create a new folder, select the desired folder in the structure under which you want to add a
new folder. Select New Folder in the context menu, and provide a name for the folder.
Select Rename in the context menu for the folder you want to rename, and enter a new name.
Use drag-and-drop or Cut/Paste to move folders in the structure.
Renaming or moving folders does not cause any broken content links on your website, but
might break incoming links from other websites or indexing from search engines.
Deleting folders
Select the folder you want to delete, and select Move to Trash in the context menu. The folder with its
content will be moved to Trash, from where it can be restored. Local folders cannot be deleted.
Since blocks and media files share the same folder structure, removing a folder affects both
the block and the media structure. You are notified about existing references to the content,
before removing it.
Setting access rights for folders
The predefined global folder is available to everyone by default. Local folders inherit the access rights
from the content (page or block) to which they are associated. It is possible to define access rights for

© Episerver 2017

36 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

specific folders in a structure. Setting access rights for folders is done from the admin view in Episerver,
in the same way as for pages in the page tree structure.
Managing folders in multiple languages
Folders are not language specific, and the folder structure for blocks and media will look the same
regardless of the language selected under the Sites tab in the navigation pane. This means that you
cannot create language versions for folders, but you can use a language code when naming them.

Media
Media in Episerver are an image, a document (such as a pdf document or a Word document), a video or
mp3 files. Media is managed from the media library on the Media tab in the assets pane where you can
create folders and upload media files. You can then make use of your media by dragging them into an
Episerver CMS page or a block, or associating them with a product in Episerver Commerce.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 37

Searching for media
Use the search field at the top of the pane to enter search criteria and retrieve media files. Clicking a
search result expands the folder where the file is located. To browse for media files, click a folder to
expand the folders and content beneath it.

© Episerver 2017

38 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Uploading media
Media files are most easily uploaded through drag-and-drop from a file location on your computer to the
upload area. You can also click directly in the upload area to add files. Or, you can select Upload Files
in the context menu for the target folder to which you want to upload files.
Publishing media
If your system has not been configured to automatically publish media files when they are uploaded,
you must manually publish, or schedule for later publishing, media files just as with other items.
There are a few important things to know regarding publishing of media files:
If media files should be automatically published on upload, you must have Publish access
rights for the folder where you upload the files. See Access rights in the CMS Administrator
User Guide.
When a media file is automatically published, it may be immediately indexed by search
engines and can thereby by found in searches. This is worth remembering if you are uploading
sensitive information that should not be accessible until a set time, such as an annual report.
If a content approval sequence has been set on your media folder, or if you have a project
enabled when uploading media, media files are never published automatically.
Inserting media
You can add links to uploaded media files, or insert images and embedded media such as videos. See
also: Adding links, Adding and editing images and Adding embedded media.
Previewing media
Media files in list views are represented by thumbnail images. Common image file formats are rendered
for preview by default in Episerver, but other rendering formats can be developed.
Downloading media
Select the desired media file in the Media structure, and select Download in the context menu. Or, if
you are previewing the media file, select Download this file from the Options combo button.
Editing metadata for media
Available metadata fields depend on the implementation; images can have photographer, description
and copyright information. Select Edit for the desired media file in the Media structure, and then the All
Properties editing view to edit the metadata properties.
Renaming media
Select the media file in the Media structure and then the All Properties editing view, and change the
Name and the Name in URL.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 39

Renaming a folder or media file changes its URL. This does not break internal links on the
website, but incoming links from external websites may break.
Replacing media
To replace an existing media file with another, upload a new file with the exact same name to the same
folder as the file you want to replace. A replaced media file is published immediately, affecting all places
on the website where the file is used.
When replacing images, the changes may not be immediately visible due to website caching.
Refresh the page to see the changes.
Managing media file versions
Versions for media files are managed in the same way as for other types of content, that is, by using the
Versions gadget. See Publishing and managing versions.

Blocks
Blocks are pieces of content that can be reused and shared between websites, while being maintained
in one place only. Typical types of content blocks are campaign teasers and banners, videos, news
feeds and contact forms. Just like for pages, you can have different block types, such as an editorial
block, or a form or page listing block.
Blocks are managed from the Blocks tab under the assets pane in Episerver CMS, where you can
create new blocks and organize them in folders. You can then utilize blocks by dragging them into the
content area of Episerver CMS pages. You can manage block versions like other types of content, and
blocks can also be personalized to be displayed for selected visitor group.

© Episerver 2017

40 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Use the search field at the top of the pane to enter search criteria and retrieve blocks. Clicking a search
result will expand the folder where the block is located. To browse for blocks, click a folder to expand
the folders and content beneath it.
Creating a block
To create blocks, editors must have Create access rights on the root directory of the website.

Creating a block from the Blocks tab in the assets pane
When using this option, the block is saved in the block folder structure, and it is available for other
pages on the website.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 41

1. Select the folder in the structure under which you want create a block, and select New Block in
the context menu, or click the Add button.
2. Select the block type among those that are available, and provide a name for the block.
3. Depending on the type of block, add content as appropriate.
4. Publish the block immediately or schedule for publishing later. Unpublished blocks are not visible
to visitors, and appear dimmed out in edit view when added to a content area.

Creating a block directly from a content area
When using this option, the block is saved in the For this page folder for the selected page, which
means that it is not available on any other pages on the website.

© Episerver 2017

42 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

1. Click Create a new block in the content area, from the On-page or the All properties editing
view.
2. Select the block type among those that are available, and then name the block.
3. Depending on the type of block, add content as appropriate.
4. Publish the block immediately or schedule for later publishing.
When creating a block, clicking Back takes you back to the page or block you were previously working
on.

Editing a block
Changes made to a block that is being used in content on the website affect all instances
where the block is used.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 43

You can edit blocks directly from the content area where it is being used, or from the Blocks tab in the
assets pane.
1. Select the desired block to edit, and select Edit in the context menu.
2. Depending on the type of block, change the content as appropriate.
If you want to rename the block, use the All Properties editing view.
3. Publish the block immediately or schedule for the changes to be published later.
Using blocks in content
Blocks can only be added to content areas that support blocks. In edit view, select the desired block in
the assets pane, and drag it into a content area of a page. A green frame indicates where it is possible to
add blocks on the page.

You can add several blocks to the same area. Drag the block above or beneath an existing block, and
drop it when the separator appears. The blocks can be rearranged later. It is also possible to add blocks
to a content area from the All Properties editing view.

© Episerver 2017

44 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Like blocks, pages from the page tree can also be dropped into a content area. Depending on
how the page template is built, the content of the selected page is rendered in the content area.
Blocks can also be added to a rich-text editor area through drag and drop.

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 45

To remove a block from a content area, select Remove from the context menu.
You can personalize blocks to display targeted information to selected visitor groups, see
Personalizing content. Personalized blocks are not displayed in the edit view. Select a content
area to display personalized blocks.

You cannot link to blocks since they do not have a web address (URL). However, you can
create links to other pages and media files if the block contains the rich-text editor
(XHTML string property).
Arranging blocks in a content area
You can change the display order of blocks by rearranging them in the content area, through drag-anddrop, or by selecting Move up or Move down in the context menu.

© Episerver 2017

46 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Displaying blocks in different styles
You can select display options for blocks on a page in different sizes and styles. The rendering of
blocks needs to have built-in support for managing different widths, in order for the content to be
properly displayed.
The following options are available:
Automatic. Select this option to display the block using an appropriate built-in style option
selected by the system.
Manually. Select this option to display the block using the specific style option, such as Full,
Wide, or Small presets for the specific context where the block is used.

Moving, copying and removing blocks in folders
Moving, copying and removing a block works in a similar way as for pages by using the context menu.
Since blocks and media files share the same folders, removing a folder from the tree structure affects all

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 47

content within the folder. If any block or media within a folder is used on the website, you are notified
about the usage before the content is moved to trash.
A block is no longer available on the website once it is moved to trash. You can see removed
blocks by selecting View Trash from the context menu of the block gadget.
Versions, content languages and access rights for blocks
Versions for blocks are managed in the same way as for other types of content. When you
update the properties for a block, a new version will be created, which will be listed in the
versions gadget. See Publishing and managing versions.
Content languages for blocks are managed in the same way as for other types of content, see
Translating content.
Access rights can be defined for creating and viewing blocks. This is done directly for a specific
block in the All Properties editing view, or for an entire block structure from the admin view. From
code it is also possible to restrict the block types that can be added to a content area. See
Setting access rights from edit view in this user guide and Access rights in the
CMS Administrator User Guide.
See also Self-optimizing block in the online help.

Roles and tasks
Episerver is designed for interaction with website visitors, and collaboration between users. A user in
Episerver is someone working with different parts of the platform. A user can belong to one or more user
groups and roles, depending on their tasks and the size and setup of the organization. Typical roles and
related tasks are described below. See Setting access rights in the CMS Administrator User Guide to
configure user groups and roles in Episerver.

Visitor
A visitor is someone who visits the website to find information or to use available services, on an ecommerce website possibly with purchasing intentions. Purchasing on an e-commerce website can be
done "anonymously" (payment and shipping details provided), or by registering an account. Visitors
may also contribute to website content as community members, which usually requires registration of
an account profile.

Community member
Content may be added by visitors or community members, if social features and community
functionality are available for the website. This content includes forum and blog postings, reviews,
ratings and comments, in which case there might be a need for monitoring this type of content on the

© Episerver 2017

48 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

website. Monitoring can be done by an editor, or a specific moderator role for large websites and online
communities.

Content editor
A content editor is someone with access to the editorial interface who creates and publishes content on
the website. Content editors with good knowledge of the website content work with search optimization
for selected content in search results. Editors may also want to follow-up on content with unusually high
or low conversion rate to update or delete this content.

Marketer
A marketer creates content and campaigns with targeted banner advertisements to ensure customers
have consistent on site experience of the various marketing channels. Furthermore, the marketer
monitors campaign KPI to optimize page conversion. A marketer with good knowledge of the website
content may also want to monitor search statistics to optimize search for campaigns and promote
content.

Merchandiser
A merchandiser typically works with stock on an e-commerce website to ensure that the strongest
products are put in focus. This role also creates landing pages, sets product pricing, coordinates crossproduct selling, oversees delivery and distribution of stock, and deals with suppliers. This user wants to
identify search queries with unusually high or low conversion rates, to adjust the search or the product
line.

Website owner
A website owner is someone with overall responsibility for the content and performance of one or more
websites. This user monitors website activities such as page conversions, customer reviews or sales
progress. Rarely creates content but can be involved in the approval of content created by others. A
website owner may have administrative access rights and may install selected add-ons on the website.

Administrator
An administrator works with configuration of various system settings from the administration user
interface, including search, languages, user access rights and visitor groups for personalized content.
Administrators may also install add-ons on the website. Administrators usually have extended access
rights compared to other user groups, and can access all parts of the Episerver platform.

Developer
A developer is someone with programming skills working with the setup and implementation of the
website, and maintenance and development of new functionality. Creates the content templates for

© Episerver 2017

Getting started | 49

pages, blocks and catalog content used by editors in CMS and Commerce, configures e-commerce
settings, and manages the index and customized search features in Find. Developers may also install
add-ons on the website.

Finding content
Follow these tips to find Episerver content within edit view.
What you know

Action

Content location within

Use the page tree structure or the blocks and media assets pane and

page, asset or block

select content.

structure
Content location on the

Use the preview option, navigate to the content on the website.

website
Content is associated

Use the projects gadget or, if you are using the projects feature, the pro-

with a project

ject overview or the project items navigation pane.

Text within content title

Use the global search in the global menu or the search fields at the top of

or body

the navigation and assets panes.
The global search can search all types of content on the website
(depending on the configured search provider).
Search fields in navigation and assets panes search for content in
respective pane and related dialogs.
See Search.

© Episerver 2017

50 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
What you know

A page's status (for

Action

Use the Tasks tab to find all content in that status.

example, draft)

Content was edited

Use the Recently changed status in the Tasks tab or the Recent gadget.

recently

See also: Managing gadgets.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 51

Creating content
Content can be pages or blocks in Episerver CMS, or catalog entries in Episerver Commerce. This
topic describes creating types of content in Episerver.

Creating a page
You create a page from page types that contain the properties where information is added.
1. In the page tree structure, select the page under which you want to add the new page.
2. Select New Page from the context menu or the add button on the toolbar.
3. Select a page type from the list of available page types, and provide a name for the page.
4. Add information in the various properties available for editing, such as the rich-text editor if this is
part of the selected page type.
5. Preview the page before sending it for approval or publishing it.

Creating a block
You create a block in a similar fashion as a page.
1. Select Create new block from the Blocks tab in the assets pane, or from the add button on the
toolbar, in which case you are prompted to define a location for the new block.

© Episerver 2017

52 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

2. Select a block type from the list of available blocks.
3. Provide a name for the block.
4. Add information for the block.
You can also create a block directly from content areas in pages.
If you add a block directly from the content area, it is saved in the For this page folder, which
means that it is available only on the selected page and cannot be used on other pages.

Commerce-related content
On an e-commerce website, content can be catalog entries such as products and variants if you have
Episerver Commerce installed. The creation of this type of content is similar to the creation of pages
and blocks in CMS. See Managing content in the Commerce User Guide.

Editing content using the rich-text editor
The TinyMCE rich-text editor is a property where you can enter information such as text with
formatting, images, tables and links to other content. The rich-text editor is used for both pages and
blocks in Episerver CMS, and for catalog content if you have Episerver Commerce installed.

The Episerver sample templates come with a selection of activated editor functions (buttons). You can
activate additional buttons from the administration view. You can drag and drop blocks into the editor
area, and pages from the page tree to create links. Spell checking is available from the browser you are
using, or through the Spell checker add-on from Episerver.

Formatting
The Styles option displays a drop-down list with predefined style formats retrieved from the CSS style
sheets on the website, to be used when formatting text.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 53

You can extend the styles list to include specific formatting for an introduction text, a predefined table
layout, or to position images with floating text in the editor area.

Copying and pasting
When you copy and paste text from external sources, you want to avoid including undesired formatting
tags. Work with plain text, or only use the Copy from Word option when copying from properly
formatted Word documents.
Toggle paste as rich or plain text pastes the text as rich text by default; toggle to
paste as plain text. Use keys Ctrl+v or Cmd+v to paste the text. Then use predefined
styles to format the text as desired.
Paste from Word keeps the formatting from the Word document. Use keys Ctrl+v or
Cmd+v to paste the content into the Paste from Word window, and click Insert to insert
the content into the page.
To transform the text formatting from Word into the website’s style, the headings and
body text must be formatted using available template styles in Word. When you copy
and paste text from Word, a ”heading 2” in Word is converted into the ”heading 2” using
the website styles.

Keyboard shortcuts
The following standard keyboard shortcuts are supported in the rich-text editor:
Command

Shortcut keys

Select all

Ctrl+a or Cmd+a

Undo

Ctrl+z or Cmd+z

Redo

Ctrl+y or Cmd+z

Bold

Ctrl+b or Cmd+b

© Episerver 2017

54 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Command

Shortcut keys

Italic

Ctrl+i or Cmd+i

Underline

Ctrl+u or Cmd+u

Copy

Ctrl+c or Cmd+c

Cut

Ctrl+x or Cmd+x

Paste

Ctrl+v or Cmd+v

H1–H6 headings

Ctrl+1–6 or Cmd+1–6

Paragraph break

Enter or Control+o

Line break

Shift+Enter

Depending on customizations and the browser you are using, certain shortcuts may not work
as described.

Adding links
Links are used on websites to link to content. In Episerver CMS, the following link types are available
by default.
Page. Links from one page to another on the same website.
Media. Links to images, documents and other media files stored on the web server.
Email. Links to create an email message with the linked email address entered.
External. Links to content on other websites or media on file shares.
Anchor. Links to sections within a page, allowing readers to jump between topics on a page.
You can also use shortcuts, a specific type of link used for navigation and reusing existing website
information. See All Properties editing view.

Creating a link
You can create a link in the rich-text editor through drag-and-drop (pages and media files), or by
selecting text and clicking the Insert/edit link button in the toolbar, which displays the Create link
dialog box.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 55

Link title displays as descriptive text for the link, such as on mouse-over.
Open in lets you display the link in a new window, often used for links to external sources.
Language lets you link to a specific language version for content. Automatic directs visitors to
the detected browsing language version.
Overview of creating different types of links:
Create link:
to page in CMS

How to:

Detailed info, see:

Drag and drop from page tree.

Linking to a page on the

or

same website

From Create link dialog box, select Page or
External link.
to page on another

From Create link dialog box, select External

Linking to a page on an

website

link.

external website

to file in CMS

Drag and drop from Media folder.

Linking to files in Media

or
From Create link dialog box, select Media.
to file on file server

From Create link dialog box, select External

Linking to files on a file

or another website

link.

server or an external web-

© Episerver 2017

56 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Create link:

How to:

Detailed info, see:
site

to email address

From Create link dialog box, select E-mail.

Linking to an email
address

to specific location

Insert anchor from toolbar, and then from

on a page (anchor

Create link dialog box, select Anchor.

Creating anchor links

link)
from image

From Create link dialog box, select any of the

Linking from an image

Page, Media, E-mail or External link option.

Linking to a page on the same website
You can create internal links in two ways:
Place the cursor in the rich-text editor where you want the link, and drag the desired page from
the page tree into the location. The page name becomes the link name (which you can edit, if
needed).
Or, select the text where you want the link in the rich-text editor, and click Insert/edit link. In the
Create link dialog box, you can select the Page option and browse to a page to link to, or select
the External link option and paste a web address (URL) to a page on your website. If you
choose the External link option, Episerver automatically converts the link to an internal link.
Remaining URL
The Remaining URL field is used to add, or edit, query string parameters. A query string is a dynamic
part of a link and is not related to the website structure. It can be data from a logged in user, data from a
form submission, search result data and so on. A typical URL containing a query string can look like
this: http://www.alloyexamplesite.com/Search/?searchQuery=reseller. The query string parameters
(in bold) following the URL open the search results for "reseller".
To create an internal link containing query string parameters, create the link in the Create link dialog
using the External link option and pasting the entire web address with the query strings parameters or
using the Page option. In that case, browse to the page and then add the query string parameters under
Remaining URL.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 57

Linking to a page on an external website
Select the text where you want the link in the rich-text editor, click Insert/edit link, and use the
External link option to enter the web address to the website to link to, such as
http://www.alloyexamplesite.com.
If you create an external link to a page found on the website you are working on, for example, by copying
and pasting a URL from the website, Episerver recognizes this and automatically converts it to an
internal link. If the link contains query strings parameters, the query string parameters can be edited in
the Remaining Url option. See Linking to a page on the same website.

Linking to files in Media
You can create links to media in the Media folder in two ways:

© Episerver 2017

58 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Place the cursor in the rich-text editor where you want the link, and drag the desired file (PDF,
Word and so on) from a Media folder into the location. The filename becomes the link name
(which you can edit, if needed).
Select the text where you want the link in the rich-text editor, click Insert/edit link and use the
Media option to select a media file to link to.
You can create a link to any type of document, but the behavior when a website visitor clicks
the link depends on the file format and the settings of the visitor's computer.

Linking to files on a file server or an external website
Select the text where you want the link in the rich-text editor, click Insert/edit link and use the External
link option to add the path or URL to the file to link to. For a file server, enter the complete path including
the computer name, and the filename with file extension. The file storage network location must be
properly accessible for this to work. Valid external prefixes are http, https, ftp and file.

Linking to an email address
Select the text where you want the link in the rich-text editor, click Insert/edit link and use the email
option to enter the email address to link to. When you click the link, the default email client opens with
the email address entered in the address field of the email.

Linking from an image
Select the image in the rich-text editor, click Insert/edit link and add a link using any of the Page,
Media, External link or Email options.

Creating anchor links
When you add an anchor, first create the anchor and then add the link to it from the Create link dialog
box.
1. Place the cursor in the text in the rich-text editor where you want to place the anchor.
2. Click Insert/edit anchor and enter a name for the anchor. Do not use special characters or
spaces.
3. Select the text in the rich-text editor where you want the link to the anchor.
4. Click Insert/edit link and use the Anchor option to select the anchor to link to.

Link properties
The following examples show common implementations of link functionality on websites, with
functionality similar to what is described for the link dialog above.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 59
Image link
When you add images to content areas intended for images or blocks and so on, instead of adding the
image in the rich-text editor, you can use an image link property which lets you select an image from a
folder in Media, automatically placing it properly in the content area. See Adding and editing images.
Link collection
A link collection is a property where you can manage a group of links.

You can create links by dropping pages or media files in the link collection area, or by creating links
through the link dialog. You can create links for pages, media files, external sources and email
addresses. You can move links to change the order in which they appear.

© Episerver 2017

60 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

You can also edit the displayed name of the link.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 61

Linking to catalog entries
If you have Episerver Commerce installed, the link dialog box contains an option to select items from
the product catalog when you create links. See Manage content in the Commerce user guide.

Adding and editing images
A web page does not embed images, instead it links to the media library where images are stored. To
display images in content, the images must be available in a folder in the Media structure. You can edit
images inside Episerver using the Image Editor, providing basic image editing features such as
cropping, resizing and transforming.

© Episerver 2017

62 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Adding images to content
Images often are added to content through an image link property, where you simply select an image
from a folder under the Media tab, and the image is automatically placed and displayed in the content.

You can also add images to the rich-text editor or content areas in pages or blocks, through dragand-drop directly from Media, or by using the toolbar in the rich-text editor:
1. Place the cursor in the editor area where you the image.
2. Click the Insert/edit image button on the editor toolbar.
3. Enter an Image description for the image. The image description is important when a reader has
turned off the display of images in the browser or when a visually impaired user is using a screen
reader.
4. Type a Title for the image. The title is shown when the reader moves a mouse over the image.
5. Select the desired image in the Media folder structure.
6. Click Insert.

Editing images
Do one of the following to access the Image Editor options:
In the rich-text editor, click the image and then select Image Editor in the toolbar.
Locate the desired image in Media, and select Open in Image Editor from the context menu.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 63

Image editing features include cropping, resizing and transforming:
Image editing
Crop

Description
Enter values for Top, Left, Width and Height, or draw a selection in the

© Episerver 2017

64 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Image editing

Description
image to crop. Note: Remember to click Apply to save the changes before
proceeding.

Resize

Enter values for Width and Height, or move a corner handle to resize, keep
Constrain proportions selected to retain the image proportions. Note:
Remember to click Apply to save the changes before proceeding.

Transform

Flip or rotate the image, or select Grayscale to convert to grayscale.

Preset values

Apply preset values for cropping and resizing, if such values are configured
for the website.

You can save an edited image file as a copy, or replace the original file:
Save as a copy. If the image was selected in a page or block, the copy is saved in the local
folder. If the edited image was selected in the media structure, the (renamed) copy is saved in
the same folder as the original.
Replace original image. This action affects places on the website where the image is used.
Selecting the Edit option in the context menu for an image lets you edit the metadata, which
for an image can be photographer, description and copyright information and such. See Media.

Removing images from content
For an image in:
an image property, click the remove option.
a content area, select Remove in the context menu.
the rich-text editor, click the image and delete it.
Removing an image makes it disappear from the content, but it remains in Media.

Changing image properties
You can control the display of images in the rich-text editor through a set of properties.
Some of these properties (Dimensions, Vertical/Horizontal space and Border) are not
supported in HTML5. If your website is configured for HTML5, you do not see unsupported
properties in the dialog box.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 65

1. Select the image you want to change in the editor area.
2. Click the Insert/edit image button on the editor toolbar.
3. On the General tab, you can change the Title and Image description. Click Update to save
your changes.
4. On the Appearance tab, you have the following options of positioning images in relation to text.
Click Update to save your changes.
Option

Description

Dimensions Change the display size of an image. Ensure that Constrain proportions is
selected to keep the image proportions. Enter the width of the image in pixels,
and the height is changed accordingly.
Class

Select a CSS class if any are available for positioning images on your website.
Or, select an option in Alignment to manually position the image.

Vertical

Add a value in pixels for the space between the image and the surrounding text

space and

if it is not handled by the CSS class. For example, this might be useful if you

Horizontal

have a large amount of text on a page and want to place an image in the top

space

right corner with the text floating around it with some space padding between
the image and the text. The preview window lets you see the result of the
different options you choose.

Border

Add a value in pixels for the image border if it is not handled by the CSS class.

Style

In the Style field, you can add inline styling. However, it is recommended to
use CSS classes.

5. On the Advanced tab, you can change any of the following. Click Update to save your
changes.
Option

Description

Alternative

Add images for mouse over and/or mouse out. Browse to select the images in

image

the media library. For best results, these images need to have the same size
proportions in pixels.

ID

Set a unique identifier for the image that you can reference by style sheets or by
a JavaScript providing additional functionality.

Language

Set the language direction (left to right or right to left) for the description, title

direction

and other text attributes specified for the image.

Language

Set the desired language if you have an image showing content in a different

© Episerver 2017

66 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Option
code

Description
language than the actual page. Enter the standard language code format, such
as it (Italian), es (Spanish), en (English) and so on.

Image map

Associate an image map with the image. Image maps map certain areas of an
image to links or other actions. There is currently no built-in way to create image
maps in TinyMCE.

Long

Type a link to provide a longer image description than what fits in the

description description field. Most visual browsers do not support this feature; this is
link

primarily an accessibility feature.

Adding embedded media
Adding embedded media to content works in the same way in both Episerver CMS and Episerver
Commerce. Embedded media can be, such as a video or Flash animations. Just as with images, the
embedded media must be available on the Media tab to link to the media file as described in Managing
media. The most common file formats are supported on the Episerver CMS sample site. For information
about other formats such as Quicktime, Windows Media, and Real Media, see available accessibility
coding standards.
Depending on the type of media you select on the General tab, the attribute options vary on the
Advanced tab. For information about Flash movie attributes, see available accessibility coding
standards.
Insert embedded media as follows:
1. Place the cursor in the editor area where you want to insert your video or animation.
2. Click Insert/edit embedded media

on the editor toolbar.

3. In Type, select the type of media and associated format, such as Flash, Quicktime or Windows
Media. Flash is the default.
4. In File/URL, browse to select the media file in the File Manager.
5. In Dimensions, set the dimensions of the movie in pixels. Ensure that Constrain properties is
selected to keep the proportions of the movie.
6. Click Insert and the media is linked into the page.

Advanced settings
By selecting the Advanced tab, you can work with advanced media settings (background color,
alignment and options for the display of media) as follows:

Advanced options
© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 67
Setting
ID

Description
Set a unique identifier for the media. The ID can be referenced by CSS style
sheets or by a JavaScript providing additional functionality.

Align

Position the display of the media on the page.

Background

Select a background color for the media by using the following options:
Picker, Palette or Named.
Click Apply to apply the background.

V-Space and H-

Enter the horizontal and vertical space in pixels to surrounding objects.

Space

Flash options
Setting
Quality

Description
Set the quality for the Flash movie to display. Specifies how to prioritize
playback speed and appearance.

Scale

Set the scale to specify how the movie adapts when displayed in a specified
area.

WMode

Set the Window Mode property of the Flash movie for transparency, layering,
and positioning in the browser.

SAlign

Specify how the movie aligns in the browser window.

Auto Play

Select to make the movie play automatically when the page is opened.

Loop

Select to make the movie repeat indefinitely. If unselected, the movie will
stop when it reaches the last frame.

Show Menu

Select to display the menu.

SWLiveConnect

Select to make the browser start Java when loading the Flash Player for the
first time.

Base

Specify a base directory or URL used to resolve all relative path statements
in the Flash Player movie. This attribute is helpful when your movies are kept
in a different directory from your other files.

Flash Vars

Set the root level variables to be sent to the movie.

© Episerver 2017

68 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Adding dynamic content
Add dynamic content to a page by retrieving it from different properties for a page. The source of the
dynamic content can be text in the “main body” field (the editor area on a page), or the date when a page
was saved.
For example, you can use dynamic content to display company facts and figures that are reused on
multiple pages of a website. You can also combine dynamic content with a visitor group; see
Personalizing content.
Dynamic content is not enabled by default. An administrator must enable it in the
administration view. If it is not enabled, you will not see the Dynamic content button

on

the editor toolbar.
Add dynamic content from a Page Property as follows:
1. Open the page or block where you want to add the dynamic content and click the Dynamic
content button

on the editor toolbar.

2. In the Dynamic content window, select the plug-in that you want to use as a base for your
dynamic content. An Episerver CMS standard installation includes the Page property plug-in,
which is used in this example.
3. In Page to insert content from, select the page in the tree structure from which you want to
display the data.
4. In Property to insert content from, select the property on the page from which you want to
display data. In this example, you fetch data from the Main body property of a page.
5. Optional: In Personalization settings, you can click + to select the visitor group you want to
have access to the dynamic content.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 69

6. Click OK. The dynamic content appears as a box in the editor area. When this property is
updated, all dynamic instances of the property in the content are automatically updated.

© Episerver 2017

70 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

7. Preview the content and publish, or schedule for later publishing.

Editing dynamic content
You can cut, copy and paste dynamic content boxes in the editor area, just as you can with any other
object. Select the “box” with dynamic content in the editor area, and click the Dynamic content toolbar
button to edit. To delete, select the dynamic content box you want to delete and click Delete.
Cut and copy for a dynamic content box in the editor area may work differently depending on
the browser you use. You may have to use the cut and copy editor toolbar buttons, or the rightclick and cut and copy of your browser, instead of the keyboard keys. If you have trouble
placing the cursor immediately before or after a dynamic content box in the editor area, try
using the keyboard arrow keys instead of the mouse.

Episerver User-Generated Content
Episerver User-Generated Content (UGC) is powered by Stackla and is a content discovery tool that
can retrieve content from popular social sites (such as Facebook, Twitter, Google) and embed the

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 71

content into existing web systems.
UGC lets marketers to leverage user-generated content to lift engagement, strengthen consumer trust,
and drive sales.
UGC gives partners the following functionality.
Use UGC’s UGC plugin and Embedded Admin user interface (EAUI) in Episerver CMS.
Create reusable UGC widget blocks.
Drag and drop created blocks into desired pages and then social content will be displayed.
Authenticate users with UGC Server (OAuth 2.0)
Embed a frameless version of the UGC Embedded Admin User Interface (EAUI) into Whitelisted
domains.
Manage user sessions within the EAUI iFrame, and perform single sign-on (SSO).
Navigate to pages outside of the EAUI iFrame.
Hide the UGC Admin User Interface Header and Menu Bar
Note: Set up information is on Episerver World.

Creating a UGC widget for Episerver CMS
Note: Episerver UGC Widgets are designed for Internet Explorer 11, Microsoft Edge, Mozilla
FireFox, and Google Chrome. However, they are not designed to be used on Internet Explorer
10 or earlier.
1. Click Episerver UGC. The UGC Admin page is embedded into your CMS site. You can perform
the same actions as with the UGC Server page such as creating terms, managing filters,
managing tags, creating widgets and so on. The Admin page informs you if you are missing any
configuration properties in the Episerver UGC Configuration page.

© Episerver 2017

72 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Note: Episerver UGC account authorization is valid for only 12 months at a time. If the
following error appears - The access token is expired. Please go to the configuration
page to re-authenticate. - go to the settings page and re-authenticate (logout then login
again).
2. In the Assets pane, select the Blocks tab and click Add. A new block name Episerver UGC
Widget appears among the available selections.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 73

3. Select the Episerver UGC Widget block.
4. Give the widget a name and select a property from the drop-down menu.
Note: While creating new Episerver UGC block on CMS site, the drop-down displays
data retrieved from UGC Server, which is cached every 5 minutes. If you create a new
widget, it may not show for up to 5 mintes until the Episerver CMS site can get the
latest widgets form the UGC server.
5. Click Create.

© Episerver 2017

74 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

6. Publish the widget. The widget appears in the blocks pane.

7. Go to the page where you want to display those widgets and drag and drop the block onto the
page. The content appears.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 75

Built-in forms functionality (Legacy)
Forms are a key element of many websites to collect information to provide a better user experience.
Some examples of forms are Contact us, Sign up for our newsletter, Sign up for an event, and Apply for
a job.

© Episerver 2017

76 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

This topic describes the built-in forms functionality in Episerver CMS which is available through a form
property. The form property is added to a page template or a block during implementation. On the
Episerver sample site, the forms functionality is made available through a Form block.
You can still use this functionality on older versions of Episerver but we recommend that you use the
block-based Episerver Forms add-on. The block-based approach to web forms has the following
advantages:
Re-use. You can re-use blocks with existing content to create new forms.
Customized rendering. You can customize rendering of forms and form elements because you
can customize rendering of blocks, including renderings for display channels, personalization,
multi-language, and permissions.

Using the built-in forms functionality
Locate the Forms property (its location depends on your system configuration), and click the button to
access the Select Form dialog, the "entrance" to forms management.

Managing forms
Forms are administered in the Select Form dialog box, from where you can view all web-based forms
on the website, organize them in folders and use them in content. You can place forms in a selected
folder when you edit or create them. You can delete form folders but you can only delete empty folders.
Click Edit to edit an existing form. You can save the existing form with a new name to keep the
original.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 77

Click Delete delete a form. You can also delete forms from within the Edit Form dialog box.
Click Select to select a form, and then Use to use the selected form in content.
Click No Form to remove a link to a form that is currently used in content.

Creating a form
Start by creating the layout, then add the desired form fields. Complete the form by providing a name
and defining the usage, then save it to become available for linking into content.

1. Creating the layout
Table Layout lets you add rows and columns as desired to design the form. The table must contain at
least one cell (row or column) before you can add any form fields.
Click Insert Row to insert a row above the row that is currently selected.
Click Add Row to add a row at the bottom of the table.
Click Delete Row to delete the selected row.
Click Insert Column to insert a column to the left of the selected column.
Click Add Column to add a column to the far right of the table.

© Episerver 2017

78 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Click Delete Column to delete the selected column.

2. Adding form fields
After creating the basic layout, click Form Fields to add the fields. Click a cell in the layout, and select
the desired type of field to add. You can also drag a desired property into the selected form table cell.
You can add only one field in each table cell. Depending on the selected field type, properties are
displayed for values to be entered. Save your changes when done with a set of field properties.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 79

Common form field properties
Field property
CSS class

Description
Apply a CSS class (format) for the field (the class must exist in the CSS files
for the website).

Name (mandatory)

Identifies the field in the database, and is not visible to visitors. You can use
the same name as for the Heading field.
Only characters A-Z, a-z, 1-9 and _ are allowed.

Heading

Indicates what should be entered in each form field.

ToolTip

The tooltip appears when you place the cursor over the form field.

© Episerver 2017

80 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Field property

Description

Value must be

Select this check box if you want a value to be mandatory. If a value is not

entered

entered in the field, an error message appears that refers primarily to the
Heading in the field. If you do not have a heading, it refers to whatever you
have entered in the Name field.

Validate as

Checks whether a form field value is entered using the correct format, for
example an email address, a date format or various types of numbers.

Form field types
Field type

Description

Text box

Short text information placed on one row.

Text area

Larger amount of free text, you can define number of characters and rows.

Drop-down list

Adds a drop-down list field type to select options from.
In the Options group, specify available alternatives.
Enter a Name for the option and a Value to identify the field in the
database.
Check Preselected to indicate an option that will be selected by
default.
You can change the order in which the options are displayed in the
list.

Radio button

Adds options where only one can be selected (compare to check box).
Use Placement to display radio buttons horizontally or vertically.
In the Options group, specify available alternatives.
Enter a Name for the option and a Value to identify the field in the
database.
Check Preselected to indicate an option that will be selected by
default.
You can change the order in which the options are displayed in the
list.

Check box

Adds options where multiple selections are allowed.
Use Placement to display radio buttons horizontally or vertically.
In the Options group, specify available alternatives.
Enter a Name for the option and a Value to identify the field in the
database.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 81
Field type

Description
Check Preselected to indicate an option that will be selected by
default.
You can change the order in which the options are displayed in the
list.

Button

Adds a button which will send the form when clicked.
Enter a Button text be displayed on the button.
In Result from sending, select an option for managing the form data
when sent:
Save to database saves the information in the database to be
retrieved from there.
In Send email to this address, enter the email address where
the message will be sent. You can add several recipients by
entering the email addresses separated by commas.
In E-mail address of sender, enter the sender’s address for the
message sent.
In E-mail subject, enter the heading for the message subject
box.
In Send to specified URL, enter the web address for the
information to be sent for further handling.

Heading

Adds a heading describing what should be entered, for example to explain
sections of large forms.

Horizontal rule

Inserts a horizontal rule into the form, for example to split large forms into
sections.

3. Completing the form
When you complete the form, enter values for the following form properties:
Form property
Name of form

Description
This name will be shown in the forms list, and in the subject row in any
email messages sent.

Form folder

The location where the form is stored.

Form can be sent

Allows anonymous visitors to post the form. If deselected, visitors need to

© Episerver 2017

82 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Form property

Description

without logging in

be logged in to the website to post the form.

Same person can send

Allows the same person (that is, computer user) to post the form multiple

the form several times

times. If deselected, the form can be posted only once per computer.

Page shown after the

Link to a confirmation page following a form posting.

form is sent
When completed, click Save and Close to return to the Select Form dialog. Click Use to link the form
to desired content.

Viewing and exporting form data
If you chose to save the form data in the database as a posting result, the aggregated form data can be
retrieved for viewing and exporting. Open the content (page or block) where you have linked to the form
in the All Properties editing view, and locate the Forms property. Select the View data option to access
the form data.

Forms data displayed is aggregated from all instances (page or block) where the form is used, if needed
select a date interval to filter the data and click Search.

© Episerver 2017

Creating content | 83

Before exporting, you can clean up the data by deleting any incorrect postings. Select the postings to
export (click Select all to include all), and select the desired format to export to:
Export to Excel exports the data to a Microsoft Excel file.
Export to XML exports the data to an XML file.

Exporting forms
You can export forms between Episerver CMS websites. When you export a form, an XML file is
created, which is then imported to the other website. Select a form to edit, go to the Import/Export tab,
and click Import or Export.

© Episerver 2017

84 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Managing content
Content can be pages and blocks in CMS, or product content from the catalog on an e-commerce site.
Content can also be assets such as images and videos, or documents in Word or PDF format.
Episerver has a sophisticated version management features, allowing multiple editors to work with draft
versions, before approving and publishing the content.
Content on a website can originate from different sources, depending on where on the site and by whom
it was created.
Editors and marketers, or merchandisers can create content internally, on an e-commerce
website.
A visitor community member can create content externally through interactive social features on
the website, if these are available.
You can preview draft content before publishing, so that you can verify the content before publishing.
When working with personalization, you can preview content the way it appears for different visitor
groups. To further limit access to content that is work-in-progress, you can also set access rights for
content from the edit view.
If you have content in multiple languages on your website, Episerver has advanced features for
managing translation of content into additional languages, including the use of fallback and replacement
languages.

Commerce-related content
See Managing e-commerce-related content in the Commerce User Guide, if you have Episerver
Commerce installed.

Optimizing content to improve search
See Working with content to optimize search in the Find User Guide, if you have Episerver Find
installed.

Working with multiple languages
Many large websites display content in several languages. Episerver has powerful support for multilanguage management, including the possibility to translate content into a wide range of languages,
defining fallback languages for non-translated content, and switching language for the editorial user
interface.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 85

How does Episerver know which language to display to visitors? Episerver enforces the language to be
visible in the URL, in the path or the domain part of the URL. When a website visitor selects a language
option (if available), content in that language appears. Alternatively, the preferred content display
language may be detected by the browser used by the visitor. If content does not exist in a selected
language, a fallback procedure may be applied.

Enabling content languages
Usually a website has a default or "master" content language set up at the time of installation. In
addition to the master language, your website may be set up with multiple other content languages. An
administrator enables languages; see Managing website languages in the Episerver Administrator User
Guide.
Administrators can also set up different access rights to different languages. This means that you may
have access to English and French content, but not to German and Spanish.
See Translating content to translate CMS content into different languages.
You can also use the Languages add-on for translating content.

User interface languages
The Episerver user interface is available in a number of different languages. To set the desired user
interface language for CMS, click your user profile name in the upper right corner. Select My Settings >
Display Options tab. At the Personal Language drop-down, select the language of your choice, and
click Save.

Commerce and multiple languages
See Multi-language management in the Commerce section to work with multiple languages if you have
Episerver Commerce installed.

Episerver Find and multiple languages
See Optimizing multiple sites and languages to work with multiple languages if you have Episerver Find
installed.

Translating content
When an administrator has enabled the desired language, you are ready to translate existing content, or
create new content in a specific language. Content here can be, for example, pages or blocks on an
Episerver CMS website, or product-related content on an e-commerce site. When a language is enabled
in Episerver, content properties that are not global are available for translation. See also: Global
properties.

© Episerver 2017

86 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

To prevent editors from accidentally creating content in the wrong language, access rights can
be set differently for different languages by an administrator. If this is implemented, you can
only edit and create content in languages to which you have access.
See also: Languages add-on to extend the functionality in Episerver for translating content into multiple
languages.
Switching language and viewing language versions
To switch language in CMS, go to the Sites tab in the navigation pane and select the desired language
to work with. The user interface reloads, displaying the page tree in the selected language.
If your master language is English and you switch to Swedish, all pages that are not yet translated into
Swedish are displayed in italics in the page tree and with the en language code for English. Pages that
exist in Swedish are displayed in normal font.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 87

To view only pages that were translated, select Show Content in Current Language Only from the
page tree's Settings button. This filters out all other language versions. You can also use this option in
the assets pane and in the Versions gadget to view blocks and versions in the current language only.
When you show content in one language only, you can move pages to another location in the
page tree structure by drag and drop or copy and paste, but it is not possible to sort pages.
Sorting is disabled since sorting in one language, where you may not see all pages, can cause
unexpected results in other languages.

The setting Show Content in Current Language Only is enabled for each pane or gadget
instance individually. This means that you, for example, can add the Versions gadget twice
and display only the current language in one of the instances and all languages in the other.

© Episerver 2017

88 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

You can also switch languages by selecting the desired language in the Header, when editing
translated content in the All Properties view. The user interface reloads, displaying the content in the
selected language.
When you translate content, you can use the Versions gadget to see the different language versions for
the content. By selecting a language in the version list, you can also switch to editing in another
language using the switch option in the notification bar.

You can search for all language versions for some content by typing a keyword in the search field for
Pages or Blocks in the assets pane.
Previewing content in different languages
Using the view settings in the “eye”

in the top menu, you can preview and edit content in one of the

languages that are available for translation on the website.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 89

Deleting language versions
To delete one or more language versions for content, select Delete Version or Delete All [language]
Versions from the More options button in the Versions gadget.
Deleting one or more language versions cannot be undone.
Translating existing content
The Sites tab displays the languages available for content creation, with the default language for the
website at the top. Languages that are enabled on the website but are not enabled for editing, are shown
in italics.

Translating a page
By default, all pages in the tree structure are displayed in the Pages tab, including those that are not
translated. These are shown in italics. To only see pages for the chosen language, select Show
Content in Current Language Only.
Do the following to translate a page:
1. Under the Sites tab in the navigation pane, select the desired target language for translation. The
interface reloads, and you are taken to the Pages tab.
2. In the page tree, select the desired page to translate, and then click Translate in the notification
bar at the top. Or, select Translate in the context menu for the page in the page tree.

© Episerver 2017

90 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

3. You can use the compare view

to translate in one pane while seeing the original version

in the other pane at the same time.
4. Edit the content and follow the content publishing flow to save and publish the translated page.

Translating a block
You can access language versions for blocks from Blocks in the assets pane. By default, all blocks are
displayed, including those that are not translated; these are shown in italics. To only see blocks for the
chosen language, select Show Content in Current Language Only.
To translate a block:
1. Under the Sites tab in the navigation pane, select the desired target language for translation, and
the interface reloads.
2. Expand the assets pane and select Blocks.
3. In the block structure, select the desired block to translate, and then the Translate option in the
context menu.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 91

4. You can use the compare view

to translate in one pane while seeing the original version

in the other pane at the same time.
5. Edit the content and follow the content publishing flow to save and publish the translated block.
Global properties
Depending on your implementation, some properties may be “globally shared” and you can edit them in
the master language. These properties are marked as non-editable when editing the content in another
language. Switch to the default language if you need to edit these. The default language is usually the
first language listed next to Languages in the header when editing in the All Properties view.

© Episerver 2017

92 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Creating new content in another language
To create content in a language other than the “master” language, select the desired language under the
Sites tab. Then select the page branch or folder where you want to create the content, and create a new
page or a new block. Add content and follow the content publishing flow to save and publish.
Commerce and multiple languages
See Multi-language management in the Commerce user guide for information about working with
multiple languages if you have Episerver Commerce installed.

Fallback languages
For many multi-language websites, only parts of the website content exist in all available languages
because translations may not be ready, content is not relevant for a specific language, or that some
content should display in a defined language.
You have the following options:
Unless a fallback or replacement language is defined, content is invisible to visitors browsing
the website in a language into which content is not translated.
Define a fallback language, in which the content appears until the content is available in the
desired language.
Define a replacement language, in which content appears regardless of the language in which
the content exists. If you define a replacement language for some content, a fallback language
does not apply.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 93

Fallback and replacement languages may cause mixed languages to be displayed on the
website.
Setting fallback and replacement languages
Fallback and replacement languages are defined from the All Properties edit view, when editing a page
or a block and then selecting Tools and Language Settings.

Language settings are inherited from the parent page. If you are redefining language settings for
a subpage to a parent page with language settings defined, you need to deselect Inherit
settings from the parent page “xxx” in the Language Settings dialog, to define settings for
the subsection.

EXAMPLE: fallback language
In this example, the master website language is English, and Swedish, Danish and Norwegian are
enabled languages. Content is first created in English, and then translated into Swedish, Norwegian and
Danish in that order. Swedish is used as first fallback for Norwegian and Danish. If content does not
exist in Swedish (not translated yet), then a second fallback language English is applied.

© Episerver 2017

94 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

EXAMPLE: replacement language
This example shows a multi-language website with a legal information section with content that should
be displayed in English. To ensure this, a replacement language is applied for the legal information page
branch.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 95

Another scenario for using replacement language is when you have started to translate content on your
website, but do not want to have mixed languages until translation is completed. When translation is
ready, you simply remove the replacement language.
See also
Translating content about translating CMS content into different languages.
Languages add-on in the online user guide about extending the functionality in Episerver for
translating content into multiple languages.

Personalizing content
Personalization in Episerver lets you target website content for selected visitor groups. For example,
you can design a product banner, a landing page or a registration form specifically for first-time visitors,
or for visitors from a geographic region or market.

© Episerver 2017

96 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

The personalization feature is based on customized visitor groups, which you create using a set of
visitor group criteria. Visitor groups must first be created to become available for selection when
applying personalization.
There are numerous visitor group criteria available across the Episerver platform; see Administering
visitor groups in the CMS Administrator User Guide.

Working with personalization
You can personalize any type of content in the rich-text editor and in a content area. Personalize part of
a text, an image, or a block in the rich-text editor, or personalize an image, a block or a page in a content
area, if you have these in your web pages.
If you have multiple visitor groups, a visitor may match more than one visitor group. You then can use
personalization groups to group content to avoid displaying the same content twice, and display
fallback content to visitors who match no visitor groups.
The preview option in the top menu lets you preview the personalized content as the different visitor
groups will see it, before publishing.

Applying personalization
In the rich-text editor
1. Open the page for editing, and select the content you want to personalize in the editor area.
in the editor toolbar.
2. Click Personalized Content
3. Select one or more visitor groups from the list.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 97

4. Preview the personalized content to verify the result.
In the content area
1. Open the page for editing, and select the content you want to personalize in the content area.
2. Select Personalize from the context menu.
3. Select one or more visitor groups from the list.

© Episerver 2017

98 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

4. Preview the personalized content to verify the result.
Editing and removing personalization settings
In the rich-text editor
Click edit for the personalized content, and update the personalization settings, or select Remove
Personalization.
In the content area
Expand the desired Personalized Group section and click the desired visitor group link to edit the
settings. To exclude content from personalization, drag it outside the group, or select Move Outside
Group in the context menu.

EXAMPLE: displaying content to multiple visitor groups without fallback
In the rich-text editor

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 99

The non-personalized text at the top of the rich-text editor in this example is always displayed. The
personalized text appears only to visitors matching any of the visitor groups UK visitors and US
visitors.
In the content area

In this example, Returning visitors see one block, and First time visitors see another. Visitors that
do not match any group do not see anything in this content area.

EXAMPLE: displaying content to multiple visitor groups with fallback
You want to display specific price information to visitors from the UK and US, and other price
information to visitors from other countries. To avoid displaying price information twice for visitors from
the UK and US, you need to use a personalization group for fallback content.

© Episerver 2017

100 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

The order in which the personalized content is placed within a personalization group does not
matter, but placing the fallback content at the end makes it easier to follow the personalization
flow.
In the rich-text editor
Select the fallback price information text and personalize it without selecting a visitor group. Instead
create a Pricing personalization group and apply this.

Personalize the price information texts for the UK and US visitor groups, and also include them in the
"Pricing" personalization group. The personalization group appears to the right.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 101

Now the personalization for this content is matched within the same personalization group.
In the content area
This example shows pricing information as individual blocks, and the Default pricing is the fallback
content displayed to visitors from other countries than the UK and US. Select Personalization in the
context menu for a block to create a personalization group, and drag the other blocks into the group.

© Episerver 2017

102 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Personalize each block within the group by applying the appropriate visitor group. Use the Everyone
option to display the fallback content displayed to visitors not matching any visitor group.

Providing access to content using visitor groups
Administrators can also grant access to specific content using visitor groups. For example, the
administrator can make a page or a block accessible only to visitors from the UK, by providing access
for the UK visitors visitor group; see Access rights in the CMS Administrator User Guide.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 103

Monitoring visitor group activities
You can monitor visitor group activities by following the number of visits to personalized content. The
result appears using the visitor groups statistics gadget on the Episerver dashboard; see Gadgets.

Personalizing Commerce content
If you have Episerver Commerce installed, there are additional visitor group criteria available specific for
e-commerce scenarios. see Personalization in the Commerce User Guide.

Personalization using add-ons

You can watch the following demonstration video, Personalizing content with Episerver and
the Eloqua database. (2:15 minutes)

You can watch the following demonstration video, Personalizing content with Episerver and
HubSpot. (2:34 minutes)

You can watch the following demonstration video, Personalizing content with Episerver and
Marketo. (2:56 minutes)

Previewing content
In Episerver, you can preview content while you are editing to view content as visitors will see it when
published. The preview button
hides the surrounding on-page editing frames and panes and you
can navigate through your website.
The preview option can display different things depending on how you are working with Episerver CMS:
You are not using projects or you are using projects via the projects gadget. The preview
option displays the published version of each page, or if there is a newer draft, the primary draft
version. You may have a draft version in a project that is not set to primary draft, in which case
the preview does not display the project version. Use the View settings > Projects option (see
table below for details) to view your website as if the items included in a project were published.
You are using the projects feature. The preview option displays the active project. If no
project is set as active, it displays the published version of each page, or if there is a newer draft,
the primary draft version.

© Episerver 2017

104 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Use View settings (the eye symbol

) to preview content with the following options:

View setting

Button

Description

options
Languages

Select a language to view the content as visitors using this language will see
it.

Visitor

View the content as the selected visitor group will see it.

groups
Media

Select a channel and/or a resolution to see the content as it will appear with

channels

the selected settings. The options are customized for your website.

Projects

Navigate and view the contents of a project to verify the display before publishing.
Note: This option is not available if the projects feature is enabled. In that
case, the preview button displays the active project. To preview another
project, you need to change the active project.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 105

You can combine previewing with the view setting options to display French content (for
example) as visitors using a mobile device and with German as preferred language will see it.

Comparing versions
In the compare view in Episerver you can compare content and properties between specific versions to
see what has changed. When you compare content, the On-page edit view displays two page versions
side-by-side. Properties are compared in the All properties edit view.
Toggle the Compare different versions button on
the toolbar to turn the compare view on and off.
The Select compare mode button appears in the
compare view and shows the selected compare
mode; that is, if you are comparing content or properties. This selection is sticky, which means that
whatever mode was used the last time you did a comparison is preselected the next time you turn on the
compare feature.
Click this button to display a drop-down menu where
you can change compare mode:

© Episerver 2017

106 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

The notification bar displays two drop-down lists from which you can choose which versions to
compare. By default, the draft is shown in the left pane and the currently published version in the right.
All language versions of the content are listed by default.

Comparing content
When you compare content, the On-page edit view shows two versions side-by-side. You can scroll
and resize the panes.
When you edit a published version in the left pane, a new draft is created and displayed in the version
list. It works in a similar way as you edit content directly on the page, and when you are done, you can
publish a draft, or republish a previous version.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 107
Comparing language versions when translating content
The current language is selected in the language selector list, and you can filter the versions by
language. You can compare versions made in the same language, or in different languages.
By comparing versions made in different languages, you can translate the content in the left pane sideby-side with the published version of the current language. You can also jump between languages to
edit by selecting the current language in the version list of the left pane, and then switch language on the
notification bar.

Comparing properties
When you select to compare all properties, the All Properties editing view displays the two compared
versions of the properties side-by-side. They are displayed in the same tabs as they usually are, with
the exception of the Basic info properties, which are displayed in a tab of their own instead of in the
Basic info area. Tabs that contain changes between versions are highlighted with a yellow digit; the digit
identifies the number of changed properties there are on the tab between the two compared versions.

© Episerver 2017

108 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

In the compare properties view, the two property versions appear side-by-side. The latest version of the
property is shown first, to the left of or above the older version of the property. All properties that differ
between the two versions are highlighted with a yellow background.

You can edit the latest version of the properties, and if you decide that you prefer the older version to the
newer, you can click Copy and the older version is used in the newer version also. When you edit a
published property, a new draft appears in the version list.

Setting access rights from edit view
Administrators generally manage website access rights from the administration view. However, if you
have administer rights, you can set access rights for a single page or a block from the edit view. This is
useful when you need to publish an item to verify the final result, but you do not want it to be publicly
visible. Setting access rights from the edit view only affects the selected item (page or block).
To set access rights, open the item in the All properties edit view (or scroll to the top of the page in the
on-page edit view). The Visible to option displays Everyone for content that is publicly available on the
website, and Restricted if access limitations apply.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 109

Click Manage to change the settings in the Access Rights dialog:

If access rights are inherited from the parent page, clear Inherit access rights from parent item, and
click Add Users/Groups to define new access rights. Add access rights as desired and save the
settings.

© Episerver 2017

110 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

For example, removing read access for Everyone, as in the example above, hides the published page
from the public, but it is fully visible and editable for the Site_Editors group (and Administrators).
You must belong to a group with Administer access rights to define access rights from the
edit view. This setting does not provide access to any other administration options in Episerver
CMS.
See Access rights in the CMS Administrator User Guide for information about working with access
rights in Episerver CMS.

Structuring the website
In the Episerver CMS, the page tree structure is located in edit view under Pages. At the top of the
structure is the root page, usually with one or more start pages directly underneath. The structure of the
website is made up of pages. By default, the page structure is reflected in the navigation menus. To
simplify navigation, limit the submenu structure to a maximum of three levels.

The page tree
By moving the mouse pointer over a page in the tree structure, information about the page appears,
such as ID and page type. A set of page tree symbols provides additional information about the
structure.
The root page.
Start page.
Published page. See Working with versions.
Page that links to another page on the same website. See Shortcut to page in Episerver
CMS under Shortcut in Working in All properties editing view.
Page that links to an external website or a specific address. See Shortcut to page on another
website under Shortcut in Working in All properties editing view.
Page containing a shortcut that is not linked anywhere; it only displays the text and is used to
create a heading with no link in the menu. See No shortcut, display text only under Shortcut
in Working in All properties editing view.
Page that fetches and displays content from another page on the same website. See Fetch content from page in Episerver CMS under Shortcut in Working in All properties editing view.
Container page used for storing other pages; not visible on the website.
Draft of a new page; not visible on the website yet. See Working with versions.
New page scheduled for publishing; not visible on the website yet. See Working with versions.
Expired page; not visible on the website anymore. See Working with versions.
Page that is set to Ready to Publish. See Working with versions.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 111
Page that is set to Rejected. See Working with versions.
Page is currently In review and must be reviewed and approved before it can be published. See
Content approvals.
Previously published page; not visible on the website anymore. See Working with versions.
Page locked for editing for the logged-in user.
Page being edited by another user. You can see who by hovering your mouse over the icon.
Published page. Note: This icon appears for project items; not in the Pages navigation pane.
See The projects feature.
You do not have the rights to publish this item or the specific item version does not exist anymore. Note: This icon appears for project items; not in the Pages navigation pane. See The projects feature.
Your website might be customized with other symbols implemented by the partner developer.

Moving, copying and removing pages
Moving a page
Use drag-and-drop to move a page, or select Cut in the context menu for the page you want to move,
and select Paste for the destination page. You can also move pages by using keyboard commands
Ctrl+x or Cmd+x, and Ctrl+v or Cmd+v.
When you move a page, internal links are redirected to the new location and are not broken.
However, external links pointing to the moved page will be broken.
Copying a page
Select Copy in the context menu for the page you want to copy, and select Paste for the destination
page. You can also copy pages by using keyboard commands Ctrl+c or Cmd+c, and Ctrl+v or Cmd+v.
Subpages and associated media files in local page folders are copied also, and the links point to the
new copy of the page. Settings, such as dynamic properties and categories, are copied also with the
new page.
When you copy and paste a page under the same node, the Name in URL property of the
copied page is typically named [Name in URL1], which you need to change after copying.
Removing content
Removed folders, pages, blocks and media files are moved to trash, and are not publicly available on
the website. Remember to update any links to removed content. When you remove a page, all
underlying pages are removed also. See Deleting and restoring content.

© Episerver 2017

112 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Sorting page order in menus
The pages in the tree structure are sorted according to a predefined sort order. By default, the page that
was created most recently is placed at the top of the tree structure, for example, in news listings. There
also are other options for sorting, such as alphabetically or by sort index. The last option lets you control
the sorting through an index defined on each page.

The sort order is set for the parent page of a branch, and is inherited by the subpages:
1. Select the parent page of the branch in the structure where you want to set the sorting.
2. Edit the page and select the Settings tab.
3. Select sorting criteria under Sort subpages.
4. Publish the page for the changes to take place.

Sorting according to sort index
If you want to control exactly how the pages in the structure are sorted, select the According to sort
index option for the parent page. Then give each child page a unique sort index number, and they are
sorted in ascending order according to their number, with the lowest number on top.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 113

Change the sort order of pages by dragging the page and dropping it where you want it in the tree
structure. Sorting pages with drag-and-drop is only of interest for branches that are sorted with sort
index.
If you move a page into a branch that is not sorted according to sort index, you get prompted to
move the page and at the same time apply sort index as sort order for that branch. Confirm with
OK. When you drag a page into a new position in a page tree branch, the sort index is
automatically recalculated to fit the sort order of that branch.
If you drop a page under a different parent page (with sort index set as sort order), the page is first
moved or copied, and then sorted. The page remains in the tree in the position where it was first
dropped.
The pages that you move are saved again, meaning that you must have publishing rights to use
drag-and-drop for sorting. You also must have publishing rights for the page branch with sort
index to which you move a page.

Sorting according to sort index manually
You can set the sort index manually for each child page. Open the page for editing, select the Settings
tab and change the number in the Sort index box. The sort index number must be an integer, but there
are no other restrictions. Work with whole tens or hundreds to insert additional pages in between
existing ones in the structure. Publish the page to apply all changes to the structure.

© Episerver 2017

114 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Deleting and restoring content
Episerver has advanced support for restoring deleted content such as pages, blocks, folders and media
files. When you remove content, you move it to trash; you do not delete it. From there, you can restore
the content or permanently delete it.

© Episerver 2017

Managing content | 115

Episerver Commerce does not support trash management when deleting catalog entries.
Moving content to trash
Select the content to delete, and select Move to Trash from the context menu.
Content that is moved to trash is automatically unpublished from the website. When moving content to
trash, you receive a notification if the content is linked to from other content on the website, because the
deletion might result in broken links.

Content versions are not supported by trash management. So, when deleting a version in the
versions gadget, the version is permanently deleted.

© Episerver 2017

116 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Restoring content
Select View Trash from the pane settings in the navigation or assets pane. Select the desired content
in the list and click Restore. The content is restored to its original place and republished. You must
restore content to edit it.
Deleting content permanently
Select View Trash from the pane settings in the navigation or assets pane. Click Empty Trash to
delete the trash content permanently (may require administrative access rights). You can automatically
empty the trash at a regular time interval using a scheduled job.

© Episerver 2017

Working with versions | 117

Working with versions
Episerver has sophisticated support for advanced management of content creation and publishing
involving multiple editors. The draft concept is central, ensuring that work-in-progress is never
externally exposed until it is actively published. The publishing options you see depend on the content
status and your access rights. Available actions, content status and notifications are indicated in the
status bar at the top.
Publishing involves steps from creating a draft to publishing the final version, and managing versions.
The steps apply to different types of content such as pages, blocks and media, or products if you have
Episerver Commerce installed on your website.

You can watch the following demonstration video, Video: Publishing content. (4:18 minutes)
See also: Controlling the publishing process.

Publishing actions
When you create or update content, you can perform a number of actions to create drafts, undo
changes, set content ready for review, publish directly or schedule publishing at a later stage, and so
on.

Creating drafts and autosaving
Whenever you create new content or edit existing content, a draft version is automatically created. This
is not publicly available on the website until actively published. Changes to content properties are
immediately autosaved by the system. Versioning is not used for drafts, which means that you and
other editors can work on the same draft over time but you still will have only one version of the draft.
You can manually create a draft from a previously published version or from a version that is scheduled
for publishing at a later time. This is done from the Options menu.

© Episerver 2017

118 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Undoing and reverting to published
While editing, clicking the Undo option in the page information area lets you undo changes to content
that was previously autosaved.
Select Undo to discard the changes done since the last autosave.
You can only undo changes you have made during the current editing session. As soon
as you move to another page, close the browser, log out, and so on, the history of
actions that can be undone is emptied.
Select Redo if you discarded your changes through Undo and want to take them back again.
Select Revert to Published to take back the latest published version, if the content was
previously published.

Previewing and comparing
You can preview content appearance using the Preview mode option in the top toolbar. You can also

© Episerver 2017

Working with versions | 119

preview content by language, visitor group or display channel if these are used on your website; see
Previewing.
You can also compare different content versions by using the Compare version option in the top
toolbar; see Comparing versions.

Publishing
When done editing, click Publish? at the top and then Publish (or Publish Changes, if you are editing
previously published content). The content is immediately published and publicly available on the
website, provided that no access restrictions apply. Click View on website to view the content as it
appears on the website.
You can also republish on older version of a page, see Managing versions.

Setting Ready to Publish
If you do not have publishing access rights, or if you want your changes to be approved by someone
else before publishing, use the Ready to Publish option to mark the content as ready for approval and
publishing. Withdraw and Edit lets you take back content for further editing after sent for approval.

Setting Ready for Review
If your site is set up to use content approvals, your content may have to be approved by one or more
approvers before it can be published. In that case, you do not have the Publish? option, and you have
to set the content to Ready for Review when you are done. Doing this starts the approval sequence.
When all approvers have approved the content, you are notified and you can publish the content or
schedule it for late publishing. See Content approvals.

© Episerver 2017

120 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Approving and publishing
If you have publishing access rights, you can approve and publish changes for content with the
status Ready to publish. You can also decide to reject the changes, in which case the content version
status is set to Rejected. This does not mean that the latest changes disappear, only that you need to
edit the content again before it can be ready for publishing. You can monitor content status and related
tasks under Tasks in edit view.

Scheduling for later publishing
If you have publishing access rights, you can schedule the publishing to occur at a later occasion.
Select the Schedule for Publish option, and set the date and time when you want the content (new or

© Episerver 2017

Working with versions | 121

updated) to be published. This applies to both newly created content, and changes to existing content.

Removing scheduling and creating new drafts
Content that is scheduled for publishing, is locked for editing. Select the Remove Scheduling and
Edit option to interrupt the scheduled publishing and continue editing the selected version.

Selecting New Draft from Here creates a new draft, based on the scheduled version, which is still
published at the scheduled time. You can continue working on the new draft, and apply publishing
actions for this, as desired. An advanced scenario would be to apply multiple publishing occasions for
different versions of a campaign page, having them replace each other in a desired order.

Managing versions
If you need to backtrack and use an older version of a page or if you are managing multiple language
versions, there are a number of tasks you can perform from the version list by using the More options
button found at the bottom of the version list in the versions gadget. Click the column headers to sort the
version list according to language, status and more.
You need to add the versions gadget to the navigation or assets pane to see the version list.

Viewing versions
Content can have the following status in the version list:
Draft. Content that is a work-in-progress and is not yet subject to any publishing actions.
Published. The most recently published version and the one publicly displayed. Only one
published version can exist.
In review. Content must be approved before it can be published. See Content approvals.

© Episerver 2017

122 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Previously Published. One or more versions that were published before the latest published
version.
Ready to Publish. Content awaiting approval and publishing.
Rejected. The content was set as Ready for Review or Ready to Publish and an approver has
rejected the content. You can edit and update the rejected content and then set it to Ready for
Review or Ready to Publish again.
Delayed Publish. Content scheduled to be published at a specified time.
Expired. Content where a stop publish date and time is set and passed. The stop publish date
applies to all versions of a page, which means that you cannot have one version of a page that is
expired and one that is published.
You can define the number of stored content versions in the administration view. The default
setting is 20.

Setting the primary draft
Versioning works differently if you are working with projects. For a more detailed description on
how Episerver handles versioning in projects, see Versioning when working in projects.
The primary draft is the draft presented in edit view, when accessing the content. Multiple drafts may
exist, by default the latest saved edited version is the primary draft.
Use the Set as Primary Draft option in the version list to make another draft the primary one.

© Episerver 2017

Working with versions | 123

A content item that is not published can have only one draft. You can create multiple drafts from
published versions, each draft is editable individually and you can schedule for publishing at different
times. There are no versioning of drafts so there is only one version of each draft.

Editing and deleting versions
The content version selected in the version list is loaded into the editing area, from where you can edit
the content or perform other available publishing actions.
Select the Delete Version option to delete a version. Content versions are not supported by trash
management. So, when you delete a version in the versions gadget, the version is permanently deleted.
The version with status Published cannot be deleted, to do this another version needs to be
published first. Deleting content versions cannot be undone. You can disable the ability to
delete versions in the administration view.

Managing language versions

© Episerver 2017

124 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

If the selected content exists in multiple languages, language versions are displayed with a language
code. To filter versions for a desired language, select Show Content in Current Language Only in
the version list.

Republishing a version
To republish a previously published version, select the desired version from the Versions gadget and
select Republish from the Options menu. When you republish content, for traceability reasons, a new
version with a new timestamp is created, even if no changes were made.

© Episerver 2017

Working with versions | 125

You can only republish a previously published version if no approval sequence has been
defined on the content item. If an approval sequence has been defined, you must select New
Draft from Here, set the new draft to Ready for Review and then let the draft be approved
before it can be published.

Unpublishing content
Unpublished content in Episerver CMS is content that is not yet published or content that you for some
reason do not want publicly visible on the website.
There is no Unpublishing option in the user interface; instead, you have the following options to hide
published content from being publicly visible on your website:
Set the content item to expired if you want to keep it for reference or future use.
Remove the ' Everyone' access rights to it.
Delete the content item if you do not want to keep it.

Setting expiration of content
Normally, web content never expires, but you can set pages and blocks to expire at a certain time in the
future or immediately. Expired content is not displayed on the website but remains in Episerver CMS.
You can remove the expiration from the content to make it appear on the website again.
The expiration sets a stop publish date on the content and this date applies to all versions of
the content. For example, if you set a page to expired and then create a draft from the latest
published version and publishes that draft, it will still be expired and not displayed on the
website. You must manually remove the expiration for the page to be public.
Setting an expiration time is done in the All Properties editing view by selecting Tools > Manage
Expiration and Archiving. Select Now if you want expiration to apply immediately.
Archiving of expired content
Episerver has a built-in archiving feature where pages with a set stop publish time are automatically
moved to a defined archive branch when the time has passed. For example, this is useful if you have
news pages in a listing where you want to remove old news from the listing, but still keep the pages.
Archiving expired content occurs in the Manage Expiration and Archiving dialog box by selecting the
page branch to which you want to move the expired page.

© Episerver 2017

126 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Working with shared content
As soon as you start to edit content, the content is marked as currently being edited notifying other
editors to avoid version conflicts.

Mark as being edited
Even if content is marked as being edited, another editor can select the Edit Anyway option, and
continue working with the draft.

© Episerver 2017

Working with versions | 127

Permanently mark as being edited
The currently being edited markup setting is automatically cleared after some time. To keep this setting,
you can set a permanently being edited markup through the All Properties editing view by selecting
Tools > Permanently Mark as Being Edited. This setting remains until manually disabled (toggle the
setting to disable).

A/B testing
A/B testing is an add-on and requires a separate installation, as it is not included by default in
an Episerver installation. The A/B testing add-on requires no additional license.
A/B testing lets you create variations for a number of page elements (blocks, images, content, buttons,
form fields, and so on), then compare which variation performs best. It measures the number of
conversions obtained from the original (control) versus the variation (challenger), and the one that
generates the most conversions during the testing period is typically promoted to the design for that
page. A/B testing has several predefined conversion goals you can use when setting up a test, and it is
also possible for Episerver developers to create customized conversion goals.

You can watch the following demonstration video, A/B testing. (5:07 minutes)

How it works
Let's say you want to know whether a different advertisement can generate more interest from your site
visitors. Using A/B testing, you create two page versions with two different advertisements that link to a

© Episerver 2017

128 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

target page. You set the A/B test to use the conversion goal Landing Page, which measures how many
visitors click on the advertisements and reach the target page.
1. When a visitor views your A/B test page, the visitor sees the original (A / Control) or the variation
(B / Challenger) version. A/B testing logs which version the visitor sees. If a visitor returns to the
test page, the visitor sees the same version (A or B) throughout the duration of the test.
However, if they clear cookies, and revisit the test page, they are considered a new visitor in the
test.
2. If a visitor clicks the advertisement, the target page appears and A/B testing logs the action as a
conversion.
3. When the test duration completes, the version that achieves the best results (that is, the most
clicks) is declared the winner of the test.
4. Depending on your site configuration, you can manually pick a winner (usually the one with most
conversions) or the winner is automatically published when the test completes. Test winners are
only automatically published if test results are statistically significant. For more information on
statistical significance on A/B tests, see the Statistical significance section below.

Statistical significance
Statistical significance is a calculation that determines if test results can be considered “significant” or
not. It is a function of the number of views and conversions of the variants. So, if one version is winning
by a wide margin but has a relatively low number of views, it could still be calculated as the statistically

© Episerver 2017

Working with versions | 129

significant winner of the test. Whereas a test with a great many more views, but where the variants'
conversion rates run much closer, could have results that would not be considered significant.
Theoretically, statistical significance can be achieved at any point during a test. This is not done here.
A/B testing lets the test finish before running the calculation that determines if the results are
“significant”.
So, how many views are needed to ensure statistical significance? The answer is that it depends on the
margin of conversions the winning variant is winning by.
Confidence level
The confidence level set in Advanced options is used in the significance calculation to specify the
amount of variance the results can have before they are considered statistically significant. The higher
the confidence level you select, the more “sure” the calculation has to be that a variant is winning by a
statistically significant margin. This is saying how much standard deviation the calculation can have
before the results are viewed as significant. Typically, the more data in a test means that the standard
deviation goes down, and thus the confidence % in those results goes up.
Once the test has completed and results are calculated using the selected confidence level, the
reporting appears at the top of the Pick a Winner screen.

Starting an A/B test
1. Start with a published version of a page or block as the original (A / Control). For example, you
have a site devoted to air travel tips and want to get visitors interested in exploring your site. Will
a fancy graphic button get more click-through than a plain text button?
2. Create a draft by changing the button or making some other change to the page:
Image on version A / Control:

Image on version B / Challenger:

3. Select Publish? > A/B Test changes. Do not publish the changed page. The A/B test view
appears showing A / Control and B / Challenger thumbnail images.

© Episerver 2017

130 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

© Episerver 2017

Working with versions | 131

4. Configure your A/B test by setting the following options:
Option

Description

Test Goal

Enter your hypothesis for the test. This is for your information only.

Conversion

Select the conversion goal or goals that you want to measure. (Conversion

goal(s)

goals are also known as key performance indicators KPIs.) You can add up to
five conversion goals for the A/B test, and under Advanced Options, you can
decide if some goals are more or less important than others.
Landing Page. Select a target page to which visitor is taken when the
visitor clicks through. Only a click-through is counted as a conversion.
Site Stickiness. Select a target page and a timeout period (1-60
minutes). The A/B test counts a conversion if a visitor goes from the
target page to any other page on your website during the time period. If
the visitor closes the browser then opens your target page again within
the specified time period, a new page view is not counted. However, a
conversion is counted if the visitor goes from the target page to another
page during the second visit.
Time on Page. Enter a time in seconds. The A/B test counts a
conversion when a visitor stays the defined time on the test page.
Add to Cart. Select a product a site visitor can add to a cart. If a
visitor adds that product to a cart, it is counted as a conversion.
Average Order. Select this conversion goal to track completed orders
on each of the test pages. The conversion goal totals up the values of
all Commerce carts created by visitors included in the A/B test. The
test determines which page variant creates the highest average value
for all those carts when picking a winner. If a visitor creates multiple

© Episerver 2017

132 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Option

Description
carts, all the (purchased) carts are included in the total, which means
that the visitor can “convert” many times in the test duration. On
Commerce websites using different currencies, the test converts all
carts to the same currency.
Purchase Product. Select a product a site visitor can buy. If a visitor
buys that product, it is counted as a conversion.
Note: You need Episerver Commerce to use Commerce-related conversion
goals such as Add to Cart, Purchase Product, and Average Order.

Participation Enter the percentage of total amount of traffic to your A/B test.
percentage

If you set it at 100%, all website visitors participate in the test. Half of the test
participants will see version A, and half of them will see version B.
However, you may not want so many visitors to see version B if it includes
something that might be unsuccessful. You accomplish this by lowering the
percentage of visitors included in the test. Visitors not included in the test will
see version A. Only visitors included in the test count in the statistics.

Test

Specify the number of days you want the test to run.

duration
Start test

Select one of the options. You can stop the test at any time before the number
of specified days are done.
Start test immediately. Select this option and click Start Test after
you specified the test parameters.
Schedule for later. Select this option and a date picker appears.
Select a date and time to start the test. Click the Schedule Test
button after you specified the test parameters.

Advanced

Balance the importance of test goals. Select if one goal is more

Options

important, or less important, than the others. If two conversion goals
are set to High (or Low), it is the same as leaving them at Medium,
meaning they have the same importance and thus not weight the test
result. Similarly, if you add a single conversion goal, the selected
weight has no effect on the test result.
Confidence level. Select the confidence level of statistical
significance you want from the results that you gather. The higher the
confidence level you select, the more “sure” the calculation has to be to
determine that the winning variant is winning by a statistically

© Episerver 2017

Working with versions | 133

Option

Description
significant margin.

5. Click Start Test if you set the test to start immediately, or Schedule Test if you scheduled the
test for later.

Viewing a running A/B test
1. To view a running A/B test, open the page you are testing, and click View Test on the notification
bar.

The test results are displayed, and a flame graphic shows which version is leading:

© Episerver 2017

.

134 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Beneath the two page thumbnails, you can view the currently collected test data, such as views,
number of conversions, and conversion rates. If you are measuring towards multiple conversion
goals, you see how each goal is performing and what weight each goal is given. If you are
measuring towards one goal only, you see the test data and a pie chart visualizing the
conversion rate. The conversion rate can be a percentage rate or an amount, if you are using the
Average Order KPI. (The pie chart is not displayed for Average Order KPI.)
Statistical significance of the test is calculated when the test is finished. Before that, it
is not possible to say whether the test results are significant or not.
2. You can select the following actions from the Options menu:
Pick The Winner. If you see enough data before the test completes, you can stop the
test and pick a winner. For example, perhaps the changed page is a clear runaway winner
such that another few days of testing may not significantly affect the result.
If you select Pick The Winner, the Pick the Winner view appears. The leader is
highlighted in green. Click Pick The Winner and it is automatically published. After you
select a winner, the loser is added to the Versions gadget as a historical artifact.

Abort A/B test. Stop the test and discard the results.

Picking a winner
Depending on your site configuration, a test winner can be published automatically at the end of the
test, or you can publish it manually, during or after the A/B test.

© Episerver 2017

Working with versions | 135
Publishing a test winner automatically
An administrator can have set up your site to automatically publish A/B test winners at the end of a test,
if the test result is statistically significant. If this setting is enabled, it affects all tests on your site. As
soon as a test finishes, the test winner is published. However, if the test result is not statistically
significant, you have to manually publish one of the test versions.
Publishing a test winner manually
If you have publishing rights, you can publish a test winner while the test is running or wait until it
finishes.
1. To view a finished A/B test, open the page you are testing, and click Pick winner on the
notification bar.

The test results are displayed.

At the top of the test result screen, you can see if the results are statistically significant.

© Episerver 2017

136 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

The test winner is highlighted with a green background and a trophy graphic:

. The Pick

The Winner button of the test winner is green, but you can publish either version.
Beneath the two page thumbnails, you can view test data, such as views, number of
conversions, and conversion rates. If you are measuring towards multiple conversion goals, you
see how each goal has performed.
2. Click Pick The Winner on the version you want to publish and it is published immediately.
The loser is still available in the Versions gadget.

Managing A/B tests
You cannot edit the test settings or the content of a page while the test is running because you could
possibly invalidate the results. If you need to change the test settings or something on the test page,
you must cancel the test, make your changes, and start the test over. You can cancel the test from the
Options menu in the test view or from the test page. If you open a draft of the test page, the Options
menu is called Publish?.
Use the Tasks tab in the navigation pane to find A/B tests.

© Episerver 2017

Working with versions | 137

Scheduled Tests. Displays links to tests that
are scheduled to run at a later time.
Active Tests. Displays links to active test
pages that are collecting data. Click an item to
display the test page, where you can click the
View test link to display the snapshot of result
data.
Completed Tests. Displays links to completed
tests. Data is no longer being collected. A
winner has not yet been published.
Archived Tests. Displays links to completed
tests where a winner has been published.
For other statuses in the Tasks bar, see Controlling the publishing process.

Viewing completed and archived tests
In the Tasks pane, you can see all A/B tested pages by selecting Active Tests, Completed Tests, or
Archived Tests. (A completed test is a test that is finished but a test winner was not yet published. An
archived test is a completed test where a test winner was published.)
To view the individual tests run on a specific page, add the Archived Tests gadget to the navigation or
assets pane and open a tested page. The gadget displays all archived tests run on the current page.
Click on a test in the gadget to view the test details. See Managing gadgets about how to add and
remove gadgets to the edit view.

© Episerver 2017

138 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Setting default values for A/B testing
Administrators can set the default values and decide if a test winner should be automatically published
or not. See A/B Testing configuration in Tool settings in the CMS Administrator Guide.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 139

Controlling the publishing process
Large organizations with geographically distributed editors often benefit from process support when
creating, reviewing, publishing and translating content. Episerver is built for a distributed way of
working, with various options for managing content creation and publishing depending on the size and
setup of organizations.
The following features can be used to control the publishing process:
Content must be approved before it can be published
Content approvals is a way to make sure that content is reviewed and approved before it is
published. When an editor has finished working on a content item, the item is set to Ready for
Review. One or more appointed reviewers must then approve the content item before it can be
published. The reviewers are defined by an administrator in an approval sequence.
Publish multiple related content items at the same time
The projects feature and the projects gadget let you preview and publish multiple content items
at the same time, such as a landing page, blocks and products (if you have Commerce installed)
that are part of a campaign.
Restrict publishing access rights
Access rights let you control what editors can do where in the content structure. A typical
example is to restrict the right to publish content to editor groups. This means that the publish
option is not available for editors. Instead, they use the “ready to publish” status option. You can
then view the content under Tasks.
Use the Tasks pane
The simplest way to monitor content creation activities is to use tasks. The Tasks option lists
changes to content filtered by content status.

© Episerver 2017

140 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

You can use the following options for monitoring content creation and content approvals:
Option

Description

Draft

Lists all draft versions on the website.

Rejected

Lists all content items that are set as Ready for Review or Ready to
Publish but were declined. You can edit and update content in status
Rejected before you set it to Ready to Publish or Ready for Review
again.

In Review

Lists all content items that are set as Ready for Review. See Content
approvals.

Ready to Publish

Lists all content items that are set as Ready to Publish.

Marked as Being

Lists all content items that someone is currently working on.

Edited

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 141

Option

Description

Recently Changed

Lists the last items that are changed for the website by you or any other
editor.

Awaiting Review

Lists the content items that you have sent for review and are in content
status In Review.

Declined Reviews

Lists the content items that you have sent for review and are declined
items in content status Rejected. As soon as the item is updated, it is
not displayed in this list anymore.

Approved

Lists the content items that you have sent for review and are approved,

Reviews

that is in content status Ready to Publish. As soon as the item is
published (or updated), it is not displayed in this list anymore.

Awaiting Your

Lists the content items that you are one of the designated approvers of.

Review
Approved by You

Lists the content items you have approved. As soon as the item is
published (or updated), it is not displayed in this list anymore.

Clicking on a content item in the filtered task list displays the item in the main area. Use the
versions gadget to see the version history for that particular content item. If you have publishing
access rights, you can decide upon further publishing actions from the versions gadget.
If you are using A/B testing, you see a number of tasks related to this feature in the Tasks list.
The available options under Tasks can also be configured specifically for your website by a
developer.

Content approvals
Content approvals is a way to make sure that content is reviewed and approved before it is published.
When an editor has finished working on a content item, the item is set to Ready for Review. One or
more appointed reviewers must then approve the content item before it can be published. The reviewers
are defined by an administrator in an approval sequence.

How it works
Sequences and reviewers
An approval sequence can be set up with any number of approval steps and any number of reviewers in
each step. The sequence is set up by an administrator; as described in Managing approval sequences
in the CMS Administrator Guide.

© Episerver 2017

142 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

The approval sequence administrator also defines, for each step individually, who can approve a
content item. It is possible to have only one person as reviewer in a step, but it is recommended to have
at least two (per language) in case one of them is unavailable.
As soon as one of the reviewers in a step approves the content, that step is considered completed and
the item moves to the next step in the approval sequence. When a content item enters an approval step,
the reviewers in that step are notified by email and in the user interface that they have an item to
approve. The editor who started the approval sequence is notified when the last reviewer approves the
content item and it is set as Ready to Publish, or if an reviewer rejects the content item. When the
content is approved in all steps, it is automatically set as Ready to Publish, and anyone with
publishing rights can publish it.
The approval sequence overview is opened from a page's or assets folder's context menu:

Editors can normally view an approval sequence but not change it. If an administrator has set an
approval sequence on a node in the page tree, editors without administrator rights cannot by-pass the
approval sequence. The Publish button is replaced by a Ready for Review button, and setting a
content item to Ready for Review starts the approval sequence.
Content approvals on assets
Each page in Episerver can have its own content approval sequence. Assets, such as blocks and
media (and also forms and catalogs if you have Episerver Forms and Episerver Commerce respectively
installed), cannot have individual approval sequences. Instead, the content approval sequence is set on
each assets folder, and all assets in a folder have the same approval sequence set. Global and sitespecific assets folders can inherit their approval sequence from a parent folder, or an administrator can
define a unique sequence for it (or disable it completely so that assets in the folder do not have to be
approved). Local assets folders inherit their approval sequence from the page they are associated with.
See Folders for a description of global, site-specific and local folders.

What happens if I want to move folders or assets that have content approval sequences set?
Moving folders and assets that have content approval sequences set, works like the following

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 143

descriptions.
Folders
Moving a folder to another global or site-specific folder. The folder keeps its original approval
sequence. You can move the folder even if items in the folder are in review.
Moving a folder to a local assets folder. The folder's approval sequence is changed to the local
assets folder’s sequence. You cannot move the folder if items in the folder are in review.
Assets
Moving an asset to a global or site-specific folder. The approval sequence on the asset is
changed to the new folder's approval sequence. You can move an item even if it is in review.
However, it continues its original content approval sequence until it is approved or rejected. After
that it has the same approval sequence as the new folder.
Moving an asset to a local asset folder. The approval sequence on the asset is changed to the
new folder's approval sequence. You cannot move the asset if it is in review.
The Blocks and Media folders in the assets pane are actually the same folders in the software
and share the same content approval sequences; the Blocks and Media tabs in the assets
pane are merely a way of filtering out blocks if you are in the Media tab and vice versa. This
means that if Adam is set as a reviewer on block folder Bunnies, Adam is also a reviewer of all
media in media folder Bunnies.
As a result, if you edit a block in the Bunnies folder which links to images in the media folder
Bunnies, and set the block to Ready for Review, the same content approval sequence is
triggered also for the images.
Forms and catalogs have their own structures, so even if you have a Commerce catalog
named Bunnies, it does not get the same content approval sequence as the Bunnies folders for
blocks and media.
If you are working on a multi-language site, items such as images that do not have a language set can
be approved by any reviewer (even by reviewers that only have access to a specific language).
Example: You have a site in English and German (where English is the master language) and you have
set up the approval sequence so that reviewer Julia is responsible for the German content items but not
the English items. You keep a folder with the two images Party_teaser_EN.png and Party_teaser_
DE.png for an English and a German version, and Julia is an designated reviewer in the approval
sequence on this image folder. Julia can then approve all images in the folder even if the Party_teaser_
EN.png is only used on English pages, which she does not have access to.
Assets added to an assets folder with a content approval sequence set are not auto published, even if
the auto publish option is set (see Auto publish media on upload in the CMS Administrator User Guide).

© Episerver 2017

144 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Multiple languages
If you have content in more than one language, each language must have at least one reviewer. The
administrator decides whether a reviewer can approve content for all languages or for specific
languages. Therefore, it is possible to have different reviewers for different languages.
Each language version can be set as Ready for Review and approved separately from the other
language version. This means that the German version of an item can be approved in three approval
steps and published before the French version has even passed approval step 1. See Translating
content to work with different languages.
Example: Content approval sequence with multi-languages
In this example, there are three reviewers in step 1, one for each of language (this is for simplicity only,
in reality you should have at least two reviewers per language). In step 2, there are two reviewers, who
have access rights to approve all languages. If one of the reviewers declines the content, that language
version is set as Rejected and needs to be set as Ready for Review again.

Approval rejections
If a reviewer does not approve a page and declines it, the page returns to being an editable draft (with
status Rejected). The responsible editor must update the page and set it to Ready for Review again.
The approval sequence then starts over, and the reviewer of the first step in the approval sequence
must approve it again, even if that reviewer had approved the first draft and it was a reviewer in a later
step who rejected the page.
Notifications and tasks
If you have started a content approval sequence by setting an item to Ready for Review, or is set as a
reviewer, you receive notifications in the user interface. The bell icon in the toolbar displays the number
of new notifications you have; click the icon to display a list of notifications. From the notification list,
you can go to the item that needs to be reviewed.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 145

If your system is configured to use email notifications, you will also receive an email; how often these
notifications are sent depends on the system configuration.

Notifications are

To:

sent when:
an item is set to

the reviewers in the first step.

Ready for Review.

Notification message:
"Awaiting your approval or one of Z
others. Step X of Y" (if there are
multiple reviewers in the step) or
"Awaiting your approval. Step X of
Y" (if there are only one reviewer in
the step).

an item was approved

the reviewers in the next step.

in a step.

"Awaiting your approval or one of Z
others. Step X of Y" (if there are
multiple reviewers in the step) or
"Awaiting your approval. Step X of
Y" (if there are only one reviewer in
the step).

all steps were

to the user who started the content

"The reviewed content has been

approved and the item

approval sequence.

approved and is now ready to pub-

is set as Ready to

lish."

Publish.
a content approval

to the user who started the content

step was declined.

approval sequence, and to all review-

"Declined by *username*".

ers in current and previous steps.
a content approval

to all reviewers in current and pre-

"Review request canceled by *user-

sequence was can-

vious steps.

name*".

celled.

© Episerver 2017

146 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

The title of the email shows that it is a review request, and you can see who requested the review. You
can also see the title of the item to be reviewed ("Black Friday shoe sale"), the language of the item
("en", which stands for English), the item type ("Page") and when the review was started ("10/21/2017
3:48 PM"). Click Review item to open the item.
To keep track of the content items you have sent for review, items that are waiting for your
approval or items you have already approved, use Tasks in the navigation pane.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 147

These are the options related to content approvals. For a description of all options, see Use the Tasks
pane in Controlling the publishing process.
Option

Description

In Review

Lists all content items that are set as Ready for Review.

Awaiting Review

Lists the content items that you have sent for review and are in content
status In Review.

Declined Reviews

Lists the content items that you have sent for review and are declined, that is
in content status Rejected. As soon as the item is updated, it is not displayed in this list anymore.

Approved Reviews

Lists the content items that you have sent for review and are approved, that
is in content status Ready to Publish. As soon as the item is published (or
updated), it is not displayed in this list anymore.

Awaiting Your

Lists the content items that you are one of the designated reviewers of.

Review
Approved by You

Lists the content items you have approved. As soon as the item is published

© Episerver 2017

148 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Option

Description
(or updated), it is not displayed in this list anymore.

What happens if a reviewer is away and cannot approve?
To avoid content getting stuck in an approval step if a reviewer is unable to approve, it is recommended
that you have at least two reviewers (per language) in a step.
An administrator can approve and publish a page at any time.
Administrators and the editor who started the approval sequence can cancel the approval sequence at
any step.
Example: Content approval sequence in two steps
Web editor Tina works in the Marketing department and has prepared a new product launch. An
approval sequence is set up for the Marketing pages, and when Tina is done, she does not have the
Publish option. Instead, she must set the new product page to Ready for Review. The page is now
locked for further editing and according to the predefined approval sequence, one of the company's chief
editors Alicia and Carlos, must review and approve the page. Alicia and Carlos are notified with an email
and also when they log in to Episerver CMS that they have a page to approve.
When Alicia or Carlos has reviewed the page, she or he approves it.
The approval sequence now states that Steve or David needs to approve the page. They are both
notified by email and in the user interface. As soon as one of them has approved the page, it is set to
Ready to publish. The approval sequence is now done and any editor (or administrator) with publishing
rights to the content can publish it. Tina, who started the approval sequence, is notified.
If Steve or David declines the approval, the content is set as Rejected and Tina must update it and set
it to Ready for Review again. Alicia or Carlos will then have to approve the second draft as well.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 149

Working with approval sequences
Starting an approval sequence
If an approval sequence is defined for the content you are working on, you cannot publish directly.
Instead, you have to start the approval sequence by clicking Publish? > Ready for Review.

When a content item is in review, its status changes to In review in the Versions gadget. Until it is
approved in all steps of the approval sequence, it is locked for editing. When it is approved in all steps, it
is set as Ready to Publish, and you are notified of this both in the user interface and by email.

© Episerver 2017

150 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Approving or declining an approval step
If you are set as reviewer for a content item, you are notified in the user interface and by email (if the
system is configured to send out emails) when it is ready for your review. Click on the user notification
or the link in the email to open the content item. If there is a previous version of the content item you
want to review, you can use the compare feature to see where changes have been made.
When you have reviewed the content item, click Approve? and then either Approve Changes or
Decline Changes. You may have to give a reason for approving or declining the content item.
If you approved the content item, it moves to the next step in the approval sequence, or if you were the
last reviewer in the sequence, it is set as Ready to Publish.
If you declined the content item, it is set as Rejected and the editor needs to update the content and set
it to Ready for Review again.

If you have multiple review requests to go through, you can use the Tasks pane to see which
items you should review and to navigate between them, and the compare feature to see where
changes have been made.
Canceling an approval sequence
You can cancel an approval sequence that you have started regardless of which step the content item is
in. Click Options > Cancel Review Request and Edit. You can now edit the content again. When
done, you have to set it as Ready for Review and the approval sequence starts over from step 1.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 151

Commenting when approving and declining content
When approving or declining content and depending on your system configuration, you may have to give
a reason for your action. This comment is visible in the user interface and email notifications to the
person who started the content approval sequence. It is also displayed in the project overview, if the
content item in review is associated with a project.

© Episerver 2017

152 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Projects
A project lets you manage the publishing process for multiple related content items. For example, you
can add a landing page, blocks, pages and products (if you have Commerce installed) to a project and
publish them, manually or scheduled, at the same time. Projects support management of content in
different language versions, so you can manage translation of content items in projects.
In Episerver, there are two ways to work with projects.
Add the projects gadget to your user interface.
Use the projects feature if it is enabled for the entire site. Enabling and disabling of the projects
feature is done in code by a developer.
The following table shows a comparison of the two methods:
Projects gadget

Projects feature

Accessible to users who add the gadget.

Accessible only if it is enabled for the entire site.

Added to your own user interface; does not

Enabled or disabled for the entire site and affects all

affect other users.

users.

You need to add content manually to a pro-

Content is automatically added if a project is active.

ject.
Other editors (not using the Projects

Content associated with a project can only be updated

gadget) can update content associated

within the context of the project. (If content is asso-

with a project.

ciated to a project, an editor who wants to edit that content needs to have that project active or create a new
draft).

When the project is published, the project

You can continue working with a project even after

is obsolete and can no longer be used.

some or all items are published.

All project items must be set to Ready to

You can publish multiple items that are set to Ready to

publish before the project is published.

publish and leave items that are not ready for a later
time.

There are no collaboration features.

You can collaborate on projects by adding comments to
projects and items.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 153

The projects gadget
A project lets you manage the publishing process for multiple related content items, such as a landing
page, blocks and products (if you have Commerce installed) that are parts of a campaign. Projects
support content management in different language versions, so that you can manage translation of
content items in the project view.

You can create new content or create draft versions of existing content, associate the content items
with a project, and then publish the project immediately or schedule it for later publishing.
You need to add the projects gadget to the left or right pane to access the project features.
Working with projects
Creating a project and adding content
Create a project from the gadget menu and add desired content items through drag-and-drop. You can
prepare the draft versions of the content items first, and then create the project and add them, or the
other way around. Use Sort in the context menu to sort content items for a better overview, and
Refresh

to reload the view if multiple editors are working on the same project.

© Episerver 2017

154 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

A specific content version can only be part of one project. If you try to add the same version to
another project, you are prompted to create a new draft.
Previewing project content
The preview option in the top menu has an option for projects where you can browse through included
items, preview them as if they were published, and update them if needed.

Publishing projects
To publish a project, all included items must first be set to status Ready to Publish. You can do this for
each item from the publishing menu when editing, or from the context menu in the Project gadget.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 155

When all items are ready for publishing, you can publish the entire project directly, or schedule the
project to be published later (if you have publishing access rights). If you need to change content in a
scheduled project, select Remove Scheduling and Edit, change the content and re-schedule the
project publishing. Published projects cannot be edited.
Removing content and deleting projects
Remove a content item from a project by selecting the item in the projects gadget and then selecting
Remove from Project from the item's context menu. Removing a content item from a project means
that it is no longer associated with the project but it is not deleted from the website.

Delete a project by selecting the project in the projects gadget and then selecting Delete Project from
the gadget's context menu. Projects are permanently deleted, but associated content items remain.
When deleting a project scheduled for publishing, you have the option to keep or remove the scheduling
for each associated item.

© Episerver 2017

156 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

EXAMPLE: Publishing a campaign using projects
This example creates a fashion sales campaign with multiple content items on a website with Episerver
CMS and Commerce. The campaign will go live on a specified date, and contain a landing page with a
product listing block, two new products to be listed in the block, and a teaser block for the start page.
You create the project first, and then add the content items.
1. In the Commerce catalog tree, create a project for the campaign and name it Spring Collection.
2. Prepare draft versions of the catalog items in Commerce, create and edit the catalog entries and
add product descriptions and assets as desired.
3. When done, drag the prepared catalog entries from the Catalog gadget to the Project gadget
where you set the products to Ready to Publish before they are added to the project, but you
can do this later.

4. Switch to the CMS edit view and create the landing page for the Spring Collection. Add text and
assets as needed, and drag the landing page to the Spring Collection project.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 157

5. Create a block listing the products included in the spring collection, and include it in the landing
page. Add the product listing block to the project.
6. Create a teaser block to be used on the landing page for promoting the new spring collection,
and add the teaser block to the project.
7. Drag the teaser block to the start page, and add the start page to the project. The Spring

Collection project now contains all the items to be included in the campaign.

© Episerver 2017

158 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

8. Preview the content items in the project, edit as needed and set to Ready to Publish when
done.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 159

9. Schedule the project to be published on the defined go-live date for the campaign.
You cannot edit versions of content items that are part of a scheduled project. For example, if
you need to update the start page before the scheduled project is published, you need to create
a new draft and then publish this. If you need to incorporate the same changes into the
scheduled project version of the start page, remove the scheduling to edit.

EXAMPLE: Managing multiple content language versions using projects
This example creates a page with a registration form block for an event. The included items need to be
available in English (the original website language), French and German, and you manage the
translation using a project.
1. Create the page and the related forms block in English first.
2. Create a project and name it Spring Meeting.
3. Add the English versions of the page and the forms block to the project.
4. Enable and activate the desired languages (here French and German) on your website, if not
already done. (Must be done by an administrator.)
5. Switch to the French language branch and create a French version for the page and the forms
block.
6. Drag the French version of the content items into the Spring Meeting project.
7. Repeat the previous actions for the German language version. You now have six content items
in the project; two for each language version.

© Episerver 2017

160 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

8. Translate the content items into French and German respectively.
Use compare to display the original English version when translating.
Use preview to verify the different language versions of the content.
9. Set all the content items to Ready to Publish when done, and publish the project or schedule it
for later publishing.

The projects feature
A project lets you manage the publishing process for multiple related content items. For example, you
can add a landing page, blocks, pages and products (if you have Commerce installed) to a project and
publish them, manually or scheduled, at the same time. The projects feature supports management of
content in different language versions, so you can manage translation of content items in projects also.
The projects feature may be disabled on your site, in which case you do not see the project bar
at the bottom of the user interface and you cannot use the feature.

You can watch the following demonstration video, Managing contents with the projects feature.
(5:20 minutes)
Project features:

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 161

The projects feature is enabled or disabled for the entire site and affects all users.
Editing actions, such as creating and updating items, automatically associate a content item
with a currently active project. Exceptions to this rule are moving items in the structure, setting
content to expired, changing access rights or language settings. These actions do not associate
content items with the active project.
Remember to deactivate the project when you no longer want to work with it. Items
wrongly associated with a project need to be manually removed from the project.
You can also manually associate items with a project by dragging and dropping them from the
page view into the project overview.
Content associated with a project is locked for editing if another project is active.
A version of content is associated with a specific project. This means that you can have a
published version of an item not associated with any project; one draft of the same item
belonging to a Summer campaign project, and another draft belonging to a VIP campaign project.
You can add, remove and update existing items even if some or all of the items within a project
are published.
You can collaborate with other editors by adding comments, and replies to comments, to project
items and to projects.
The project interface consists of three main parts; the project bar at the bottom, the overview and
the project items navigation pane to the left.

© Episerver 2017

162 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Projects user interface
The project bar
When a developer enables the projects feature, a project bar appears at the bottom of the CMS window.

When you first access the edit view with the projects feature enabled, no project is selected in the
project bar. When you select a project, it is preselected the next time you open the user interface.
If a project is active—that is, is selected in the project bar—all changes (creating a new page or block,
updating existing content, uploading an image and so on) are automatically associated with that project.
If you select the option None (use primary drafts), you can work with content items as usual without
associating them with any projects.
From the context menu on the project bar, you can create, rename and delete projects.

If you delete an active project, the project bar turns red. Associated items are not deleted but are no
longer associated with a project.
The project overview
From the projects bar, you can open an overview that displays content items associated with the active
project.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 163

The overview shows details such as name, content status, content type, and time and date for latest
change of each content item.
Each content item in the overview has a context menu from which you can set the item to Ready to
Publish, open it for editing and remove it from the project, providing you have Edit access rights. The
context menu button appears when you hover the mouse over an item.
You can select multiple items in the overview and remove them from the project or set them as Ready
to Publish all at the same time. Common mouse and keyboard functionality for selecting multiple items
is supported, except for Ctrl + a which is not supported.
From Options in the overview, you can publish all items that are set to Ready to publish immediately or
schedule them for publishing at a later time.
Show comments opens a view where you can select a project item and see a list of events connected
to the item. You can add comments on each event and also reply to comments, see Working with
comments.
Use Sort

to order content items for a better overview, and Refresh

to reload the view if there are

multiple editors working on the same project.
The project items navigation pane
The project items navigation pane provides quick access to items in the project. Double-click on an item
to open it.

© Episerver 2017

164 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Each content item in the project items pane has a context menu displayed when you hover the mouse
over an item; the menu options are the same as those in the project overview. You can select multiple
items in the list the same way as in the project overview.
Versioning when working in projects
Add the versions gadget to your user interface if you are working with multiple drafts and
projects to see a list of the different versions.
It is only one version of a page that is associated with the project. This means you can have a published
version of a page and several drafts, and any one of these versions can be associated with the project.
If the associated version is the published version, the project overview displays Published for that
item. If it is not the published version, the overview displays Draft, Previously Published, Expired
and so on.
You can only have one published version, so if you publish another version of the page (that is, a version
that is not associated with the project) after the version associated with the project, the project version
is not published anymore and therefore set as Previously published in the project overview.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 165

When you open an item and have a project active, Episerver CMS displays the version associated with
the active project. If you open an item and do not have a project active, Episerver displays the version
that is set as primary. You can see which version is the primary in the versions gadget; the primary
version is marked with a target symbol

. The primary draft is not necessarily the latest version. See

also: Setting the primary draft.
When the projects feature is enabled, versioning works in the following ways:
Project 'X' is selec-

Result

ted
and you create new

The draft is created and added to the active project automatically. Because

content from scratch:

this is the only version of the content, it is set as the primary draft.

and you update exist-

Is the content a draft and associated with the active project?

ing content:

Yes: The draft is saved and still associated with the active project.
Whichever version was the primary draft before is still the primary draft.
No, the content is a published version or a draft not associated with
the active project: A new draft is created and is associated with the active
project. The previous version is still the primary draft. Note: If there is a
previous draft within the project in the same language, the previous draft is
replaced with this new draft as only one version can be associated with a
project. The previous draft remains in Episerver as a draft but is no longer
associated with a project. A draft of the same project item but in another
language is not replaced as it is viewed as another version of the item. This
means that you can have one draft in English and one draft in French of page
Z in the project X, but you cannot have two drafts in English of that page.

© Episerver 2017

166 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6
Project 'X' is selec-

Result

ted

None (use primary

Result

drafts) is selected
and you create new

The draft is created and set as primary draft.

content from scratch:
and you update exist-

Is the content a draft? Note: It does not matter if the content is associated

ing content:

with a project or not; versioning works the same in this case.
Yes: The draft is updated and saved. If it was associated with a project
before you edited the draft, it will still be associated with the project
afterwards. Whichever version was the primary draft before is still the
primary draft.
No, the content is not a draft: A new draft is created and is not associated
with a project. It is set as the primary draft. Note: If the updated content is a
media file and auto publish is turned on, the media is automatically published
at this stage.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 167

Working with projects
Creating a project and adding content
You create a new project from the context menu on the project bar.

When you create the project, it is automatically set as the active project. To add a content item to the
active project, make an editing change (such as creating a page, updating existing content, uploading
an image and so on), and the content item is automatically associated with the project. You can also
drag and drop items from the navigation or asset panes into the project overview to associate them with
a project.
A specific content version can only be part of one project. If you try to add the same version to
another project, you are prompted to create a new draft. If you choose to create a new draft, the
new version is then added to the project.
Editing content in projects
You will see a notification if the version you are working on is associated with the active project.

Content not associated with the active project but with another project is locked for editing. However,
even if that version is locked for editing, you still can create a new draft with the New Draft from Here
button in the yellow toolbar. That draft is associated with the active project, or to no project at all if None
(use primary drafts) is selected.

If you want to make a change that should not be associated with the active project, you have to select
None (use primary drafts) or another project from the project bar. When None (use primary drafts) is

© Episerver 2017

168 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

selected in the project bar, you can create drafts, publish content and so on, as long as the content
version is not associated with a project.
Content items that are part of a project remain so even after they are published.
Uploading media to projects
If you upload media while a project is active, it automatically associated with the active project.
Note: If you have a project active when you upload a media file, you must manually publish the
media file, even if your system is configured to automatically publish media as soon as it is
uploaded. See the Auto publish media on upload setting in System settings in the
CMS Administrator Guide. Media associated with a project need to be published like any other
content item.
Previewing project content
The preview option in the top menu lets you browse through the website as if the project were published.
If you click preview

, you preview the active project; to preview another project, change the project

in the project bar. Previewing a project shows you the draft associated with the project or, if there is no
draft associated with the project, the published version.
Collaborating on projects
You can add comments on project items in the project overview and, for example, ask other editors to
review an item. This feature is described in Working with comments.
Publishing project items
From the project overview, you can publish multiple items that are set to status Ready to Publish. You
can set items to Ready to Publish from the publishing menu while editing an item, from the context
menu in project overview, or from the Project Items navigation pane. You can select multiple items and
set them to Ready to Publish, both from the overview and the navigation pane. You publish the
content items associated with the project, not the project itself.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 169

© Episerver 2017

170 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

When items are ready for publishing, you can publish them directly from Options, if you have publishing
access rights, or schedule the project to be published later.

If the items in a project were scheduled for publishing and you add new items to the project, the
new content is not scheduled for publishing automatically. You must specifically set the new
content to scheduled time of publishing if you want it to be published at the same time as the
other items in the project.
If you need to edit content that is scheduled, select Remove Scheduling and Edit, edit the content
and reschedule.
You can continue working with a project after it is published.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 171

Removing content and deleting projects
Removing content from projects
Remove a content item from a project by selecting the item in the project overview or from the project
items navigation pane and then selecting Remove from Project from the item's context menu.
Removing a content item from a project means that it is no longer associated with the project but it is
not deleted from the website.

Deleting projects
Delete a project by selecting the project in the project bar and then select Delete Project from the
context menu. Associated content items are not deleted but are no longer associated with a project.
You cannot recover deleted projects. When deleting a project with items scheduled for publishing, you
can keep or remove the scheduling for each item.

Examples of using the project functionality
Example: Publishing a customer event using projects
This example creates an invitation to a customer event, including a registration form (using a block), a
thank you for the registration-page, and a teaser block for the start page. All content items for the event
are scheduled to publish at the same time.

© Episerver 2017

172 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

1. Create a new project for the event from the project bar and call it Customer event.
2. Prepare a page with information on the event. The page is automatically added to the project.
You can set the page to Ready to publish or do that at a later stage.

3. Prepare a thank you-page.
4. Create a registration form using the built-in form functionality or the Episerver Forms add-on. On
the sample site, this is done with a form block. Set up the form so that a visitor who registers for
the event is directed to the thank you-page.
5. Create a teaser block to use on the start page for promoting the customer event and drag it to the
start page. The Customer event project now contains all items related to the event.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 173

6. Preview the pages by clicking the preview button

.

Does the start page contain the teaser?
Does it lead to the customer event detail page?
Fill in the form and make sure that you are directed to the thank you-page.
7. Go to the overview and select all items by pressing Shift on your keyboard and selecting the top
and the bottom items.

© Episerver 2017

174 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

8. From the context menu of one the items, choose Ready to publish and all items are ready to be
published.
9. Select Options > Schedule Items for Publish in the overview.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 175

10. Select 1 August at 11 AM and click Select.
You cannot edit scheduled versions of items that are part of a project. If you need to
publish the start page before the scheduled version is published, you need to create a
new draft and then publish that. To incorporate the same changes into the scheduled
project version of the start page, you must remove the scheduling, edit the content and
then re-set the scheduling.
Example: Managing multiple content language versions using projects
This example creates a page with a registration form block for an event. The included items need to be
available in English (the original website language), French and German, and you will manage the
translation using a project.
1. Create a project and name it Spring Meeting.
2. Create the page and the related forms block in English first. They are automatically associated
with the project.
3. Enable and activate the desired languages (here French and German) on your website, if not
already done. (Must be done by an administrator.)
4. Switch to the French language branch and create a French version for the page and the forms
block.
5. Repeat the previous actions for the German version. You now have six content items in the
project, two for each language. You can see all six items in the Project Items navigation pane.

© Episerver 2017

176 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

A language code appears for items in other languages. In the image above, the English
site is selected under Sites; therefore, items in English are not marked with a language
code.
6. Translate the content items into French and German respectively. Use compare to display the
original English version when translating. Use preview to verify the different language versions of
the content.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 177

7. Set all content items to Ready to Publish when done, and publish the project or schedule it for
later publishing from Options in the project overview.

Working with comments
Comments facilitate collaboration between editors of a project. You can add comments on a project or
on specific project items or actions, add information about changes you have made, ask other editors to

© Episerver 2017

178 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

review the item and so on. Other editors can view your comments and reply to them, and also add their
own. You can also tag users in a comment.
A comment is only connected to the current version. As soon as a new version of the project
item is created, the comment connected to the previous version disappears.
If another user has tagged you, made a comment on one of your actions or replied to one of your
comments, you are notified in the user interface. The bell icon in the toolbar displays the number of new
notifications you have. Click the icon to display a list of notifications. From the notification list, you can
go to the project overview to read the comment.

If you go to the project overview to read a comment, the project is automatically activated. If
you do not want to continue working in the project, you have to deactivate it.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 179

If your system is configured to use email notifications, you receive an email when someone else replies
to one of your comments or replies, or if you have set a project item to Ready to Publish and someone
else comments on this action. You also are notified if someone tags you in a comment. How often these
notifications are sent depends on the system configuration.
Adding a comment to a project or project item
1. To add a comment to:
a project, select the Project Comments tab in the project overview.
a project item, select Show comments in the Items tab of the project overview and then
a project item. Items that already have comments have a comment icon

.

2. Add a comment in the comment text box.
You need access rights to the item to view and post comments.
3. To tag another user, enter @ followed by the user name. Select the user from the displayed list
of suggested users. The tagged user receives an email notification and a notification in the user
interface when logging in. You can tag any of the available users but the tagged user still needs
access rights to the project item to see the actual comment.

© Episerver 2017

180 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

4. Press Enter or click Post.

© Episerver 2017

Controlling the publishing process | 181

Replying to a comment
Click Reply on the comment you want to reply to and enter your comment in the text box. Press Enter
or click Post.
Editing a comment or reply
You can edit comments and replies that you have created yourself. Click Edit on the comment or reply
you want to change. Press Enter or click Save. Edited comments or replies are marked with a pen
symbol

.

Deleting a comment or reply
You cannot delete comments or replies yet.

© Episerver 2017

182 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Reports
Reports are valuable tools for content editors, website owners, marketers and merchandisers, to
monitor various website activities. Episerver comes with a set of built-in reports, and you can develop
customized reports for your website.

Reports for CMS content
You can use reports for websites to locate broken links and expired pages, or to get an overview of
simple addresses used on the website. Obtain reports from the Reports option in the Episerver CMS
global menu.

When you generate a report, select the desired report and the starting point in the page tree from where
you want the report to include data, then click Show Report. You can filter data by time and language,
and pages included in the report results open in edit view when you click on a page link.
The following sample reports are available for Episerver CMS:
Report

Description

Not published pages

Displays unpublished pages that have a change date within a specified time
span.

Published pages

Displays pages that have a publish date within a specified time span.

© Episerver 2017

Reports | 183
Report

Description

Changed pages

Displays pages that have a change date within a specified time span.

Expired pages

Displays pages with stop publish date within a specified time span.

Simple addresses

Displays pages with a simple address.

Link status

Displays links that could not be contacted in the link check scheduled job.

Some reports rely on scheduled jobs running in the background for generating report data; see
Scheduled jobs in the CMS Administration User Guide.

Reports in Commerce
You can use reports in Episerver Commerce to follow-up on sales performance, or to monitor inventory
stock information for products. See Reporting in the Commerce user guide, if you have a website with
Commerce installed.

© Episerver 2017

184 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Managing gadgets
A gadget is a small application or add-on that can be made available for easy access from the
dashboard or the assets and navigation panes in Episerver. There are built-in gadgets both for the
Episerver platform and product-specific ones, for example, gadgets for forms viewing, visitor groups
statistics, version management and the product catalog, if you have Commerce installed. Developers
can also develop custom gadgets to extend the features of your Episerver solution.

Gadgets are managed in a similar fashion both on the dashboard and in the panes in edit view. Click
the Settings icon to access the gadget management options.

© Episerver 2017

Managing gadgets | 185

Adding gadgets
Select Add Gadgets, and select a gadget to add from the list of available gadgets.

Rearranging gadgets
Select Rearrange Gadgets, select a gadget, and drag it to the desired position on the dashboard or in a
pane.

Removing gadgets
Select Rearrange Gadgets, and click the Remove gadget symbol next to the gadget you want to
remove from the dashboard or pane.

Built-in gadgets
Gadgets for the dashboard
External links provides an overview of the external links of your website.
Forms viewer lets you monitor the activity for a specific web form.
Notes lets you add colorful “post it” notes to your dashboard.
RSS feed reader shows the latest feeds from an RSS source of your choice.
Visitor groups statistics is used to monitor visitor groups viewing personalized content.
See dashboard gadgets to edit the configuration settings for dashboard gadgets.

Gadgets for the panes in edit view
Archived Tests is used to view archived A/B tests. See A/B testing.
Blocks is used to access blocks (default in the assets pane).
Media is used to access media files (default in the assets pane).
Forms is used to access forms (default in the assets pane if the Episerver Forms add-on is
installed).
Forms Elements displays the forms elements that can be used when creating a form (only
available if the Episerver Forms add-on is installed).
Project Items is used to view items belonging to a project. You can multi-select and mark items
as Ready to Publish from this gadget.
Sites displays the page tree for the website.
Recent displays items you have viewed during your current browser session.
Tasks displays tasks to be done on the website. This gadget lets you filter items on status. You
can, for example, see a list of all items set as Ready to Publish.
Recently changed displays recently changed content on the website.

© Episerver 2017

186 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Versions is used to manage content versions. See Working with versions to work with versions.
Some gadgets are available by default in the user interface, while others need to be added manually.

Commerce-specific gadgets
Episerver Commerce comes with a set of e-commerce-specific gadgets.

Add-ons
Many add-ons are made available in the user interface as gadgets to extend the capabilities within
various areas of Episerver.

Managing dashboard tabs
The Episerver dashboard, available from the top menu, is an area where you can add gadgets for
presenting high-level information or provide quick access to common tasks such as viewing recently
changed pages or monitoring a web form.

Tabs
Tabs are used for organizing the dashboard information. You can create your own tabs, and add gadgets
of your choice. For example, you can have one tab for the marketing team, and one for product editors,
with specific gadgets available for each of these groups. You can customize the layout of each tab by

© Episerver 2017

Managing gadgets | 187

setting the number of columns for displaying information. There will be at least one default tab available
in the overview.
Creating tabs
Add a new tab on the dashboard as follows:
1. Select New Tab from the dashboard menu.
2. Select Rename Tab in the drop-down list for the tab you want to add and type a name for the
tab.
3. In Layout, define how many columns the tab information area will have by clicking one of the
available options.
4. Add the gadgets you want to the tab you have just created as described in Managing gadgets.
You cannot change the order of tabs after they are created.
Editing tabs
Edit a tab on the dashboard as follows:
1. Click the arrow for the tab you want to edit. You have the following options:
Select Rename Tab to change the name of the tab.
Select Layout to change the number of columns on the tab. All existing gadgets will be
moved to available columns in the new layout.
2. Select Save to save your changes.
Deleting tabs
Delete a tab from the dashboard as follows:
1. Click the arrow for the tab you want to delete.
2. Select Delete Tab in the drop-down list for the tab you want to delete.
3. Select Yes to confirm the deletion.
There must be at least one tab available on the dashboard, which means that the last remaining
tab cannot be deleted.

Dashboard gadgets
Episerver comes with a set of predefined gadgets which can be added to the personalized dashboard,
for easy access by editors and website managers in their daily work. To edit configuration settings for
these gadgets, add them to the dashboard, click the Settings icon and select Edit. Configuration
options for each gadget are described below.

© Episerver 2017

188 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

External links
This gadget provides an overview of the external links of your website. The list displays pages
containing links to a specific external web address. This is useful if you want to find out to which
external websites you are referring to from your own website. You can choose to display the full URL for
each link and the number of items to display in the list.
Forms viewer
This gadget lets you monitor activity for a specific web-based form, such as a poll, a registration or
contact form. This is intended not only for editors, but anyone who has an interest in the activities of
your website, for example, a marketing or business area manager. The gadget displays a selected
number of the latest activities, such as the latest votes or registrations to a form. The result can also be
displayed graphically.

© Episerver 2017

Managing gadgets | 189

Select the desired form to monitor on the website.
The gadgets retrieve the fields available in the form, and you can select the ones to include in the
monitoring.
Select whether you want to display the post dates, and enter chart settings as desired.
Select the updating frequency for the information in the forms viewer.
The “Demo mode” provides a graphical demonstration view based on a built-in example form
viewer “XFormsViewerGadgetDemo”.
Notes
Use this gadget to add colorful “post it” notes on the dashboard. Add the gadget to the dashboard, enter
the text and select size and color for the information.
RSS feed reader
This gadget is used to display information from RSS feeds on the dashboard. The gadget shows the
latest feeds from a selected RSS source. Add the feed URL, the number of items to show and a title for
the feed.
Visitor groups statistics
If you are using personalization on your website, this gadget displays statistics for selected visitor
groups viewing personalized content. By default, statistics are only counted once per session for each
visitor group. This gadget can be used from the dashboard and the panes, and also an iPhone or iPad.
Select the type of chart to be used in the Statistic View section.
Select the visitor groups (must be defined first) you want to include in your statistics.
Filter the display by day, month and year.
Click

to select the start and end dates in the statistics interval.

© Episerver 2017

190 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Search
The Episerver platform has sophisticated search functionality that lets you search through different
types of website content. You can search for content pages, blocks, files, community objects and
products, if Episerver Commerce is installed. The search results are based on access rights, so users
only see content to which they have access.
The search is based on the open-source search engine Lucene, which is used by the different Episerver
products when retrieving content. The search is provider-based, letting you extend and customize
features. You can use the built-in basic search features or create your own custom filtering methods and
queries.

Built-in search features
The following built-in search features are included in Episerver:
Full-text search features.
Indexing of all content types: document files, pages and blocks.
Event-driven indexing, meaning instant updating of the index and search results.
Search results filtered on access rights.
“Search-as-you-type,” enhancing the search experience.
Supports basic boolean operators like AND, OR, NOT, + , - and *.

Search options
Depending on how your Episerver installation is set up and from where you are searching, there are
different options:
When editing, the global search is available in the upper right part of the global menu.
Depending on the configured search providers, this option can search all types of content on the
website—pages, blocks, files, and catalog content if you have Episerver Commerce installed.

© Episerver 2017

Search | 191

When editing, a search option is available at the top of the navigation and assets panes, and in
the link dialog. This option searches for content in the panes and related dialogs.

Searching in the CMS edit view is described in the Finding content topic.
Site visitors can usually search content through a search field and a search page on the front-end
site, as in the Episerver sample templates.
You can add items directly from the search result list to, for example, a page or a block through
drag-and-drop.

© Episerver 2017

192 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

Search tips
Enter a few carefully selected keywords separated by space. If need be, narrow down your
search query by adding keywords. For example: episerver product project.
If you know a page ID, search for the page by entering the ID in the search field.
When searching for specific phrases, combine keywords using quotation marks. Example:
“episerver search tips”.
The search function is case-insensitive, so you can use both uppercase and lowercase letters.
Example: New York and new york return the same result.
You can restrict the search by placing a plus sign (+) in front of the words that must be found to
consider the page a match. Example: +episerver +search +tips.
Similarly, you can restrict the search by placing a minus sign – in front of the words that must not
occur to consider the page a match, for example -episerver -search -tips.
To match part of a word, place an asterisk * at the end of the word. Example: word1* word2
return content with the words word10, word123 and word2, but not word234.
You can use the boolean operators AND and OR.
AND means I only want documents that contain both/all words. Example: episerver
AND search returns documents with both words.
OR means I want documents that contain either word. Example: episerver OR search
returns documents with either episerver or search.

Sorting search results
The sorting of search results is determined by the search algorithm, which you can customize in many
ways. Often, filtering is applied to the results, which can be based on many factors, such as
categorization of content.

Configuring search
Episerver search has configuration options that are managed from the administrative interface in
Episerver CMS. See Episerver's technical documentation for information about search functionality,
configuration possibilities, and integration interface.

Extended search with Episerver Find
To build more advanced search features based on visitor behavior, customized filtering and faceted
content navigation, you can add Episerver Find to your solution (requires license activation); see the
Episerver FindUser Guide.

© Episerver 2017

Index
A

adding to content

43

A/B Testing

approving

142

setting up tests

area

managing from edit
108

role
all properties, editing

collection link

59

copying

46

comments

177

creating

51

community member role 47

ture 40
in For this page
folder 41

70

administrators
48
21

displaying

46

editing

42

finding

40

in multiple languages 47

alternative image, defin65

inserting into editor

44

anchor links

58

moving

46

approving content

141

overview

39

ing

removing from con-

approving content
changes

tent area

120

archiving expired content

125

assets
approving

142

overview

33

B

45

translating

90

versions

47

border, image, defining

65

buttons, rich-text editor

52

C

comparing
content properties

107

content versions

105

content
adding images

access rights

47

62

adding to project gadget

153

approving

120

archiving expired

125

area
personalizing 97
blocks
adding 43
arranging 45
comparing two languages

107

creating

51

in another
language 92

category, content tab

blocks

65

45

139

add-ons
live monitor

image

in block folder struc-

publishing, restricting

changing for an

arranging in content

127

access rights

view

class, css

property

30

changed pages report

183

deleting
permanently 116

115

194 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

draft

117, 121

primary 122
dynamic
editing 70
overview 68

shared

126

D

tab

29

dashboard

186

translating

89

gadgets

187

versions

121

tabs

186

comparing 105

date modified, updating
deleting

editing

25

language 123

editor role

48

primary draft 122

expired

122

content approvals

141

finding

49

approving

149

developer role

assets

142

display in navigation

language
versions 123
115

overview

84

permanently mark as
127

personalizing

95

previewing

103

29

149

downloading media

38

commenting

151

draft content

117

declining

149

sequence

lished

approval
sequence

148

example, working
guages

once 153
ready to publish

republishing

124

122

notifications

144

overview

68

overview

141

sequence
tasks

149
144

working with
149

copying and pasting
reverting to previous
rich-text editor

E
edit view

restoring from trash 116

118

primary version

70

approvals

version

121

editing

119
111

definition

dynamic content

starting approval

removing

106

144

comparing 107

several items at

comparing with pub-

example, basic

with multi-lan-

139

48

property

properties

publishing

115

permanently 116

canceling approval

moving to trash

being edited

content

31

53

additional properties

25
27

editing
all properties

21

content

21

on-page

21

editor
scheduling for publishing

inserting blocks

120

© Episerver 2017

44

Index | 195

rich-text

52

forms

keyboard

creating

77

data, exporting

83

data, viewing

82

field types

80

fields, adding

78

layout

77

125

overview

75

183

page shown upon

shortcuts 53
paste from Word 53
email links, inserting

58

embedded media, inserting

66

expired pages report

external links gadget

submission
83

globalization

84

H
horizontal space, chan-

92

66

folders
access rights

35

creating

35

deleting

35

for all sites

34

for this block

34

for this page

34

for this sites

34

moving

35

multi-language

36

overview

33
35

65
54

82

image map, defining for
66

81
images

user submitting mul-

188

flash animations, insert-

renaming

190

image
submit without login

tiple
viewer gadget

ing

global search

I

F
fallback language

91

hyperlinks overview

exporting
form data

lating

ging for an image

expired content, archiving

global properties, trans-

82

adding to content

62

188

alternative

65

approving

142

border

65

CSS class

65

defining image map

66

dimensions

65

editing

62

horizontal space

65

inserting link from

58

language code

65

language direction

65

long description

66

properties, changing

64

removing

64

vertical space

65

G
gadgets
adding

185

built-in

185

dashboard

185, 187

external links

188

for panes in edit view 185
forms viewer

188

notes

189

overview

184

rearranging

185

removing

185

RSS feed reader

189

visitor groups statistics
global menu

© Episerver 2017

189
16

196 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

K

from image

58

renaming

38

keyboard shortcuts,

internal

56

replacing

39

overview

54

searching for

37

status report

183

uploading

38

to email address

58

versions, managing

39

rich-text editor

53

L
language code, setting
for image

65
to files on external

language direction, setting for image

website

58

to files on file server

58

to media files

57

65

languages
blocks

47
live monitor

comparing content in
overview

different

107

creating content in

92

login

92

long description, for

fallback

16

images
impact on folders

70

66

36
84

previewing content

property
104

property

29

replacement

92

menus, sorting pages

112

merchandiser role

48

metadata, media

38

modified date, updating

31

N
name in URL property

28

notes gadget

189

on-page editing

main body, content tab
in

16

O

M
managing

menu, global

marketer role

30

P

48

page order, sorting in
menus

media

page tree icons

channels, preswitching

86

user interface

85

viewing content

38

deleting 89

embedded, inserting

66

searching for 88

files, linking to

57

inserting

38

links
anchor

58

metadata, editing

38

collection

59

overview

36

creating

54

previewing

38

57

publishing

38

external

© Episerver 2017

112
110

pages
104

downloading

versions

21

changed report

183

copying

111

creating

51

expired report

183

icons

110

moving

111

not published report 182
published report

182

translating

89

Index | 197

tree structure

110

overview

160

19

previewing content

168

19

project bar

162

panes
settings
paste from Word, rich-

53

personalization
applying in content
area

97

applying within editor 96
editing

98

overview

95

removing

98

previewing
103

as visitor group 104
at different resolutions 104
for a project 104

163

publishing content

168

removing content

171

uploading media

168

user interface

162

project gadget

managing via tasks

139

project gadget

154

publishing media

38

language 104
via different media
channels 104
media

38

project gadget

154
122

R
ready to publish

removing scheduled publishing of content 121
replacement language

92

153

creating

153

changed pages

183

deleting

155

expired pages

183

overview

153

link status

183

previewing

154

not published pages 182

publishing

154

overview

182

removing content

155

published pages

182

152

simple addresses

183

examples

171

republishing content

124

previewing content

104

resolution, previewing

reports

content using

properties
content, comparing

107

editing

28

restoring content

104
116

reverting to previously
published content 118

published content
rich-text editor

project feature

119

adding content

projects

in another

primary draft

igation pane

139

project feature 168

project items nav-

text editor

content

content

52

comparing with draft 106

adding content

167

creating project

167

applying perreverting to previous
version

deleting project

171

published pages report

editing content

167

publishing
access, restricting
© Episerver 2017

sonalization

96

118
182
119
139

buttons

52

copying and pasting

53

styles

52

198 | Episerver CMS Editor User Guide 17-6

roles

47

shortcuts, keyboard

administrator

48

rich-text editor

community member

47

simple addresses

content editor

48

property

28

versions

developer

48

report

183

blocks

47

marketer

48

content

121

merchandiser

48

visitor

47

website owner

48

RSS feed reader gadget 189

structure

removing

112

structure website

110

styles, rich-text editor

52

T

120

85

primary draft 122
republishing 124
language, switching

86

vertical space, changing
186

for an image

65

video

managing content

A/B testing

creation tasks 139

121

TinyMCE editor

search

languages, enabling
V

tasks

scheduling content for
publishing

53

sorting pages in tree

tabs

S

user interface

52

192

boolean

192

case sensitivity

192

translation

configuring

192

blocks

90

global

190

content

89

in panes

191

global properties

91

multiple terms

192

overview

85

overview

190

pages

89

page ID

192

several items sim-

partial word

192

sorting

192

settings tab

31

shared content

126

shortcut, defining

31

oritizing mouse
input from

ultaneously
trash

with the pro-

24

Eloqua

153

HubSpot

103

personalization with
Marketo

103

publishing content

117

video files, inserting

66

visible to property

29

visitor groups
previewing content

104

statistics
116

gadget 189
visitor role

U

© Episerver 2017

103

personalization with

restoring content

uploading media

160

personalization with

115

from

managing contents
jects feature

touch screen, pri-

AND OR

127

38

47

Index | 199

W
websites
owner role

48

structure

110

© Episerver 2017

